---
title: "S. Kramer"
date: 2023-11-16
type: journal
area: finance
tags: [type/journal, area/finance, status/active, topic/finance-theory]
status: active
source_file: "PERSONAL/SCHOOL/HMSM/PremasterPart2/Elective Finance/Final sources/S. Kramer.pdf"
source_type: pdf
confidence: 0.8
imported: 2026-05-14
---

STEPHAN KRAMER AND FRANK HARTMANN
How Top-down and Bottom-up Budgeting
Affect Budget Slack and Performance
through Social and Economic Exchange
This paper investigates the effects of a top-down (TD) versus bottom-up
(BU) orientation in different stages of the budgetary target-setting
process on slack and managerial performance. We use social exchange
theory
to
explain
the
outcomes
of
these
alternative
budgetary
arrangements, and complement the traditional focus on budgetary
participation in target setting with a process-oriented perspective. We
develop hypotheses predicting that TD and BU orientations in the
subsequent stages of the budgeting process have different effects on
managers’ exchange relationships with the ﬁrm, and their behavioural
responses. Using survey evidence from German managers across 127
ﬁrms we ﬁnd that a TD orientation in the issuance of guidelines
enhances economic exchange and that a BU orientation in the develop-
ment of the initial budget proposal enhances social exchange, which
in turn are associated with reduced slack and higher performance,
respectively.
Key words: Budgeting; Target setting; Social exchange theory; Survey.
The budgetary control cycle is an important and pervasive organizational process,
but our academic understanding of its overall success or failure remains fairly
limited (Luft and Shields, 2003; Shields and Shields, 1998). This is especially true
for the impact of the separately identiﬁable steps in the budgetary target-setting
process, which have, as yet, not been a topic of academic enquiry. The academic
literature’s interest in budgetary target setting is traditionally directed at the sub-
ordinate manager’s interaction with his (her) immediate supervisor (Luft and
Shields, 2003). These studies have typically examined how budgetary participation,
Stephan Kramer (skramer@rsm.nl) is Assistant Professor of Management Accounting and Management
Control and Frank Hartmann (fhartmann@rsm.nl) is Full Professor of Management Accounting and
Management Control at Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
The authors are grateful to Jasmijn Bol, Werner Bruggeman, Jonas Gerdin, Stewart Jones, Victor Maas,
Pascal Nevries, Paolo Perego, Marcel Van Rinsum, Steve Salterio, Utz Schäffer, David Smith, and Jürgen
Weber; and participants at the 7th EIASM Conference on New Directions in Management Accounting
2010, the Global Management Accounting Research Symposium 2011, the workshop at the University of
Sydney, RSM Erasmus University and WHU—Otto Beisheim School of Management for their helpful
comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper.
bs_bs_banner
ABACUS, Vol. 50, No. 3, 2014
doi: 10.1111/abac.12032
314
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

that is, the amount of involvement and inﬂuence a manager is granted by his (her)
immediate supervisor when determining budgetary targets, explains behavioural
responses
(Brownell,
1982;
Shields
and
Shields,
1998). Those
supervisor–
subordinate interactions are embedded in a wider organizational process of bud-
getary target setting, which is however, typically designed and decided upon at a
higher organizational level. We develop a theoretical framework that predicts indi-
vidual behavioural responses elicited by the tightness versus looseness of the orga-
nizational process of budgetary target setting, which is distinctive of supervisor–
subordinate interactions.
As the analytical point of departure we choose the concepts of top-down (TD)
and bottom-up (BU) budgeting, which denote, respectively, a tight and loose
approach to budgetary target-setting process design. TD and BU budgeting
are prominently discussed in the practitioner and vocational literatures (e.g.,
Lorange and Vancil, 1977; Merchant and Van der Stede, 2012); the practical origin
of these terms, however, limits their immediate applicability for academic enquiry.
In the ﬁrst step of our analysis we break the target-setting process down into
separately identiﬁable stages and develop an operational deﬁnition of TD and BU
characteristics for each stage. To this aim, we integrate ﬁndings from the budgeting
literature and an exploratory ﬁeld study. In the second step of our analysis we use
social exchange theory (Blau, 1964; Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005) to predict
how a TD or BU orientation in each of the process stages affects managers’ inter-
pretations of their exchange relationships with the ﬁrm. According to social
exchange theory, these interpretations can be either social or economic, which in
turn explain subsequent managerial behaviour. We focus on the two behaviours,
budgetary slack creation and managerial performance, that are generally deemed
crucial for measuring budgetary effectiveness (Luft and Shields, 2003). In particu-
lar, we expect that a dominance of TD budgeting characteristics in the issuance of
guidelines enhances managers’ perceptions of an economic exchange relationship
with the ﬁrm, deﬁned by the clariﬁcation of the mutual provision of economic and
tangible resources. This results in lower budgetary slack. In contrast, we expect
that a dominance of BU budgeting characteristics in the development of the initial
budget proposal and the negotiation of the ﬁnal budget enhances managers’ per-
ceptions of a social exchange relationship with the ﬁrm, deﬁned by the mutual
provision of socio-emotional resources, such as recognition and respect. This
results in higher (self-reported) performance.
This paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, we develop and
empirically conﬁrm a TD and BU typology of the budgeting process. This
typology complements the literature’s focus on supervisor–subordinate interac-
tions by procedural characteristics in the target-setting process. Second, we
demonstrate that the effects of TD and BU on managerial performance and
budgetary slack are mediated by managerial perceptions of the social or
economic nature of the relationship with their company. Overall, our ﬁndings
suggest that process characteristics of target setting can fruitfully complement
the traditional perspective of budgetary participation in explaining budgetary
outcomes.
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
315
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

LITERATURE REVIEW
The process of setting budgetary targets is considered to be a cornerstone of man-
agement control in most ﬁrms (Hansen et al., 2003). Through this process, organiza-
tions simultaneously lay the foundation for managerial performance evaluation,
coordination of activities between managers at various levels and functions, and
allocation of resources to individual managers (Fisher et al., 2002b; Hansen and Van
der Stede, 2004).The budgetary target-setting process is typically intense, extends to
managers across all levels of the organizational hierarchy, and involves several
consecutive steps and procedures (Anthony and Govindarajan, 2007). The inherent
complexity and comprehensiveness of this process causes its big impact on manag-
ers’ relationships with their ﬁrms. In particular, budgeting is not only meant to
determine managers’ economic positions in the ﬁrm by specifying formal targets and
allocating resources (Hansen and Van der Stede, 2004; Horngren et al., 2009). Extant
evidence also suggests that budgeting practices can send different social signals, to
the extent that managers’ inputs and opinions are taken into account during the
process, thereby affecting managers’ feelings about, and attitudes towards, the ﬁrm
(Kyj and Parker, 2008; Nouri and Parker, 1998; Shields and Shields, 1998). E.g., in a
pioneering study of managerial responses to budgetary practices, Argyris (1952, p.
10) documents the ability of such practices to cause ‘fear, resentment, hostility, and
aggression on the part of the employees toward the company [. . .] which may lead
to decreased production’.
While such responses are the likely consequence of the organization’s overall
budgetary target-setting process, most research on this subject has adopted a differ-
ent focus. More speciﬁcally, the majority of studies on budgetary target setting have
concentrated on managers’ reactions to varying levels of budgetary participation
(Shields and Shields, 1998). This construct denotes the amount of involvement and
inﬂuence a manager is granted by his (her) immediate supervisor when determining
budgetary targets (Brownell, 1982; Milani, 1975; Shields and Shields, 1998). Partici-
pative budgeting has been studied as an antecedent of managerial performance,
using cognitive (Brownell, 1981; Chenhall and Brownell, 1988; Harrison, 1992; Kren,
1992) and motivational (Brownell and McInnes, 1986; Govindarajan, 1986; Kenis,
1979; Milani, 1975) theories to test its direct and indirect effects, for example, via
trust (Lau and Buckland, 2001), fairness (Lau and Tan, 2006; Wentzel, 2002), com-
mitment (Nouri and Parker, 1998), or job-relevant information (Kren, 1992). It has
also been used to explain budgeting effectiveness, most prominently via slack build-
ing behaviour (Dunk, 1993; Govindarajan, 1986; Lau and Eggleton, 2003; Young,
1985). Overall, these studies explain only a modest amount of variance in budgetary
effectiveness and managerial performance, as several overview and meta-analytic
studies document (Derfuss, 2009; Dunk and Nouri, 1998; Shields and Shields, 1998;
Wagner, 1994). One likely reason for this is the exclusive focus of budgetary partici-
pation studies on interactions within the supervisor–subordinate dyad (Shields
and Shields, 1998). Budgetary target setting, however, spans the whole organiza-
tion, and budgetary constraints may originate higher up in the organizational hier-
archy and thus outside the scope of the supervisor–subordinate dyad (Merchant and
ABACUS
316
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

Van der Stede, 2012; Shields, 2005). For example, if a superior is able to explain that
a subordinate’s budget request has been overruled by restrictions from elsewhere,
rather than by discretion, negative attitudes towards the ﬁrm, rather than towards
the superior, may occur and cause a deterioration of the relationship with the ﬁrm
and subsequent undesirable behaviour (e.g., Bies and Shapiro, 1988; Bies et al., 1988;
Libby, 1999).
This suggests that extant research on participation in budgetary target setting
can be complemented by focusing on the managerial responses to the process
design, rather than the interpersonal aspects, and by considering a corresponding
theoretical perspective that is able to capture both the economic and social con-
sequences of budgetary target-setting processes. Regarding the former, we propose
to study TD and BU target setting to capture a factual notion of budgetary process
design. Regarding the latter, we propose social exchange theory (SET) to docu-
ment managers’ attitudinal and behavioural budgetary target-setting responses
toward the organization (Coyle-Shapiro and Shore, 2007). SET is used to predict
how the provision of tangible and socio-emotional resources by organizations
shapes the perceptions that the employees have of their relationships with that
organization. SET distinguishes two broad categories of relationships: those that
are economic and those that are social in nature (Blau, 1964; Rupp and
Cropanzano, 2002).
An economic exchange relationship is focused on the exchange of material and
tangible resources between the organization and its employees, such as working
time for compensation (Shore et al., 2006). This type of exchange is transactional in
nature
and
signiﬁes
the
inherent
self-interest
of
the
exchanging
parties
(Coyle-Shapiro and Shore, 2007). It draws on an explicit understanding of mutual
obligations and beneﬁts, which are contracted and formalized ex-ante, and subject to
formal control systems for rewards and punishments (Cropanzano and Mitchell,
2005). A social exchange relationship, instead, revolves around exchange of socio-
emotional resources, such as recognition, respect, and mutual support (Shore et al.,
2006). Social exchange is relational in nature, and the well being of the other party
dominates considerations of economic self-interest. Unlike in economic exchange
relationships, mutual obligations are unspeciﬁed and diffuse under social exchange,
rendering them unenforceable (Settoon et al., 1996).
Social and economic exchange perceptions co-exist (Shore et al., 2006), and meta-
analytical studies have consistently shown that employees reciprocate beneﬁcial
treatment by their organization with positive workplace behaviour, such as organi-
zational commitment, job-related affect and job involvement, reduced withdrawal
behaviour, and in- and extra-role performance (Blau, 1964; Cropanzano and
Mitchell, 2005; Rhoades and Eisenberger, 2002). However, the empirical evidence
on drivers of social and economic exchange perceptions is sparse. Existing studies
suggest that organizational design plays an important role in this respect: Song et al.
(2009) report positive effects of transformational leadership, integrative culture and
an employment approach of mutual investment on social exchange perceptions and
subsequent employee commitment and task performance. Takeuchi et al. (2007)
show that the positive effect of high performance work systems on organizational
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
317
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

performance is mediated by social exchange perceptions. In line with the above
ﬁndings, we propose the design of the budgetary target-setting process as reﬂected
by TD and BU budgeting to be an important predictor of managers’ social and
economic exchange relationships with their organization.
DEFINING TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETARY PROCESSES
TheTD and BU labels are well established in the vocational literature and textbooks
to describe alternative process design characteristics of budgetary target setting in
practice (e.g., Lorange and Vancil, 1977; Merchant and Van der Stede, 2012;
Umapathy, 1987). Lorange (1980, p. 69) describes TD and BU in terms of ‘the
initiative and direction that top management gives to the planning process’. Lorange
and Vancil (1977) refer to TD and BU budgeting as the level in the hierarchy that
ﬁrst suggests lower-level management’s goals.Kono (1976) characterizesTD and BU
in terms of the hierarchical level that exerts authority over various aspects of goal
setting, budget plan creation and budget approval. Töpfer (1978) and Anthony and
Govindarajan (2007) outline that TD stands for global framework plans and guide-
lines set at top management level, which are subsequently used by lower-level
management to develop their budget plans. While those descriptions provide an
implicit notion of the characteristics of TD and BU budgeting, they lack the ana-
lytical and operational precision of a comprehensive account of the TD/BU typology
required for academic enquiry.
The academic literature refers to TD/BU either from an analytical perspective
focusing on principal–agent relationships (e.g., Baiman and Evans, 1983; Baiman
et al., 1990; Chen, 2003), or through the lens of experimental negotiations, which
focus on superior–subordinate interactions (e.g., Fisher et al., 2000, 2002a,b, 2006).
Neither address the procedural characteristics of budgetary target setting we focus
on in our study.
Therefore, we used Anthony and Govindarajan’s (2007, pp. 388–89) chronological
typology of budgetary target-setting processes, which consists of four sequential
stages: (1) the issuance of guidelines; (2) the development of an initial budget
proposal; (3) budget negotiation; and (4) approval to complement insights from the
literature with ﬁeld interviews in each of the stages to develop a broader, yet
analytically accurate, operational deﬁnition of the TD–BU typology. We conducted
ﬁeld interviews with a sample consisting of 10 large German ﬁrms from different
industries. We selected ﬁrms that had a degree of formalization in budgeting, which
would enable the identiﬁcation of structural aspects in the target-setting process.We
also aimed to enlarge the potential environmental and internal variance reﬂected in
different budgeting processes across ﬁrms. Ten ﬁrms participated in our study, and
their descriptive statistics are listed in Table 1.
Within each ﬁrm, interviews were conducted with both the head of the manage-
ment accounting department and one management accountant involved in the bud-
geting process. The interviews lasted approximately 60 minutes each and were
mostly conducted in person at the corporate headquarters of the participating
ABACUS
318
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

companies.1 The companies also shared secondary data sources with us, such as their
planning manuals, process charts, global framework plans, and guidelines. We used
this material to gain an understanding of the factors that characterize a TD or BU
orientation in the different stages of the budgeting process, and subsequently
derived items that we deemed representative for each of those stages.
For the purpose of our analysis, we combined the budget negotiation stage and the
approval stage of Anthony and Govindarajan’s (2007) framework, based on our
observation that approval typically marks the last step in the negotiation. In the ﬁrst
stage of the budgeting process, that is, during the issuance of guidelines, directives
and expected target levels are issued by higher-level management downwards in the
hierarchy. A TD orientation in this stage is characterized by a high speciﬁcity of
given directives and expected target levels, for example, by prescribing comprehen-
sive cost caps and revenue hurdles on items that lower-level management is held
accountable for. Likewise, detailed planning assumptions such as inﬂation or growth
forecasts in speciﬁc markets serve as boundary conditions for lower-level manage-
ment’s subsequent planning.A representative comment by one interviewee empha-
sizes this point:
I am not saying that our expectations about the budget targets are carved in stone. But they
are very binding and speciﬁc. Otherwise they would be of no use.
Conversely, a BU orientation in this process stage is characterized by the absence
of clear and speciﬁc planning assumptions and expected budget target levels.
Instead, upper-level management refrains from imposing speciﬁc constraints on
budget items and issues planning guidelines that inform lower-level management’s
budget planning.
1
The conversation followed a semi-structured outline, and covered general questions about the bud-
geting process as well as speciﬁc questions about the TD–BU orientation.
Table 1
OVERVIEW OF THE INTERVIEWED COMPANIES
No.
Industry
Turnover (in million €)
Employees
1
Retail
65,500
286,000
2
Telecommunications
64,600
258,000
3
Energy
47,700
70,000
4
Logistics and communication
46,200
436,000
5
Chemicals and pharmaceuticals
31,100
108,000
6
Aviation
22,200
117,000
7
Consumer goods
13,500
51,000
8
Software and IT solutions
10,600
47,000
9
Home appliances
8,400
40,000
10
Consumer goods
5,700
20,000
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
319
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

In the next stage of the budgeting process, that is, the development of an initial
budget proposal, lower-level management creates the initial budget proposal.A TD
orientation in this process stage is reﬂected by the strictness that higher-level man-
agement exhibits in enforcing compliance with issued directives and expected target
levels when lower-level management creates the budget proposal.Thus, subordinate
units’ discretion in planning their budget proposal is limited. One of our
interviewees illustrated this approach:
When planning the budget, there is barely deviation from the directives given earlier. That is
the top-down element.
Under a BU orientation, deviations from distributed directives and expected
budget target levels are handled more leniently, that is, budget proposals of
lower-level management that deviate from issued guidelines and directives are
tolerated.
In the ﬁnal stage, that is, the negotiation and approval of the budget, upper- and
lower-level management negotiate the ﬁnal budget.A TD orientation in this stage is
characterized by the amount of rigidity in the negotiation process. Procedural rigid-
ity is implemented to inﬂuence upper-level units to make fewer concessions to
lower-level units in the course of the budget negotiation. This is reﬂected in the
process by putting upper-level management into a dominant role, for example, by
setting upper-level management’s expectations of the ﬁnal budget ﬁgures as a
starting point in the negotiation, which establishes those as a reference point
against which lower-level units have to argue if they want to enact changes to
the ﬁnal budget. One of our interviewees summarized the purpose of this
procedure:
Lower-level management needs to have good and valid reasons if they want to argue against
the intended budget. Because upper management sets the initial expectations, you need to
have good arguments to convince them that changes are indeed justiﬁed.
Further, under a TD orientation less time is scheduled for negotiations such that
lower-level management is given less opportunity to reach concessions on potential
requests to change the budget.This is in keeping with the fact that lower-level units’
provision of input is less emphasized and mutual agreement on the ﬁnal budget is
less important. Finally, a TD orientation is characterized by a materialization of
upper-level management’s opinions on certain positions in the ﬁnal budget. Those
opinions are typically based on global and aggregated metrics such as commodity
prices or peer benchmarks compared to the operational costs and revenue data of
lower-level units. A BU orientation, on the other hand, is reﬂected by lower-level
units that actively present their draft of a ﬁnal budget, an extensive negotiation
period, and a ﬁnal budget that reﬂects lower-level units’ opinions and which is based
on operational data.
We capture the TD or BU orientation in the corresponding three distinct stages—
speciﬁcity of given directives and expected target levels, strictness of compliance
enforcement of budget proposals with issued standards and rigidity of the negotia-
tion process—with three reﬂective indicators each after assessing their face validity
with a group of practitioners.
ABACUS
320
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT
We argue that the design of the process by which budgetary targets are set is an
essential antecedent to managers’ perceptions of their exchange relationships: given
the high importance of budgetary control arrangements and their interconnections
to the performance measurement and incentive system (Hansen et al., 2003), differ-
ent approaches to budgetary target setting will affect both perceptions of the social
and economic relationships with the company. Speciﬁc hypotheses will now be
developed.
Speciﬁcity of Given Directives and Expected Target Levels
In this stage, a strong TD orientation reﬂecting a high speciﬁcity of given directives
and expected target levels is expected to be positively related to economic exchange.
Economic exchange is characterized by the explicit and formalized communication
of mutual obligations and rewards between the exchange parties.This is in line with
a TD orientation in this stage, where superior units clearly formulate and specify
their expectations towards subordinate units. Because the performance target
expectations are imposed on subordinate managers without further discussion, this
process structure is likely to emphasize the economic component of the relationship,
highlighting the importance of job fulﬁllment (Shore et al., 2006). In addition, com-
municating highly speciﬁc target levels without consultation is more impersonal and
self-interested with regard to the objectives of the company, which further strength-
ens the perception of an economic exchange component among the respective
lower-level managers (Shore et al., 2006). Finally, a TD process emphasizes hierar-
chical structures inside the organization. Prior research has shown that hierarchical
culture is associated with an increasing perception of economic exchange (Song
et al., 2009). Under a BU orientation, no speciﬁc target levels are formulated during
this process stage, leaving the managers unclear about what is expected of them.
Thus, a BU orientation in this process stage exerts a negative effect on the economic
exchange dimension, because a less strict approach to setting targets also obscures
the clarity and speciﬁcity of the targets, and thus reduces the salience of the eco-
nomic character (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005). We hypothesize:
H1:
A top-down (bottom-up) orientation in the issuance of guidelines increases
(decreases) managers’ perceptions of economic exchange with their company.
Strictness of Compliance Enforcement of Budget Proposals with Issued Standards
A TD orientation in this stage reﬂects strict rules for enforcing compliance between
the issued standards and the budget proposal that subordinate units create.A strong
TD orientation is expected to decrease the perception of social exchange for several
reasons. First, it puts more restrictions on subordinate managers when they plan
their budget proposals. These constrained degrees of freedom in expressing one’s
own opinion and the low tolerance for deviations are perceived as being disrespect-
ful and lacking in recognition by subordinate managers who may have their own
view on what the budget targets should be. This induces feelings that the company
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
321
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

does not care about the subordinate managers’ well being, which undermines their
perceptions of social exchange (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005). Second, a process
structure that does not allow for a say in the creation of codiﬁed budget goals is
perceived as unfair (Libby, 1999, 2001). Low levels of procedural fairness have been
shown to decrease perceptions of social exchange (Masterson et al., 2000; Moorman
et al., 1998).Third,a strict enforcement of compliance will likely decrease the intensity
of communication between superior and subordinate units in the process, as discus-
sions about deviations from the initial expectation level set by higher levels are
discouraged. Communication, however, is a foundation of social exchange, because
socio-emotional resources such as recognition and respect are predominantly con-
veyed via language (Molm, 2003).A lack of communication owing to the restrictions
of a strict TD process thus renders the relationship with the company more imper-
sonal, weakening perceptions of social exchange (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005).
On the other hand, a strong BU orientation in the creation of budget proposals is
not too constrained by expectations imposed by superior units. Thus, subordinate
units can express their opinion on the budget target by deviating from the expecta-
tion communicated to them. The autonomous creation of a budget target proposal
signals the company’s trust in a manager’s competence and integrity, as autonomy in
the creation of budget target proposals can also be misused to incorporate slack into
the budget. Thus, we hypothesize:
H2:
A top-down (bottom-up) orientation in the development of the initial budget
proposal decreases (increases) managers’ perceptions of social exchange with
their company.
Rigidity of the Negotiation Process
A strong TD orientation in this stage reﬂects high procedural rigidity, which aims to
inﬂuence upper-level units to make fewer concessions to lower-level units (Fisher
et al., 2000, 2006).This is expected to reduce perceptions of social exchange because
this process design signals to managers of subordinate units that their provision of
input is less appreciated and that the company does not emphasize the importance
of reaching a mutual agreement on the ﬁnal budget (Cropanzano and Mitchell,
2005). Moreover, less time for negotiations as is typical for a TD orientation in this
stage further reduces the opportunity for constructive communication. Under a BU
orientation, procedural rigidity is low, which allows lower-level units to interact with
upper-level units through prolonged negotiation rounds and constructive discus-
sions.As a consequence, mutual agreement on a ﬁnal budget is more likely to occur,
even though upper-level units will have to make some concessions to lower-level
units in the process.Taken together, this is expected to increase perceptions of social
exchange. Thus, we hypothesize:
H3:
A top-down (bottom-up) orientation in the negotiation of the ﬁnal budget
decreases (increases) managers’ perceptions of social exchange with their
company.
Prior literature reports a strong link between social exchange and performance
dimensions, be it in- or extra-role performance (Eisenberger et al., 2001; Rhoades
ABACUS
322
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

and Eisenberger, 2002; Wayne et al., 1997). Employees who are treated favourably
by their organization will feel obliged to discharge and repay this positive treatment
(Eisenberger et al., 2001). This results in increased organizational commitment, job-
related affect, job involvement, and self-efﬁcacy as well as reduced withdrawal
behaviour (Rhoades and Eisenberger, 2002). Moreover, social exchange accompa-
nies increased fairness and trust perceptions. Ultimately, these aspects that result
from high social exchange lead to higher efforts in regular job duties and objectives,
which is reﬂected in higher in-role performance (Eisenberger et al., 2001). Another
consequence of social exchange is an increase in extra-role activities that go beyond
the employees’ formal job description, such as an increased willingness to cooperate
and an emphasis on helping co-workers (Rhoades and Eisenberger, 2002). In line
with these arguments, we hypothesize:
H4:
Managers’ perceptions of social exchange with their company increase mana-
gerial performance.
Economic exchange relationships highlight the self-interested behaviour of both
exchange parties (Blau, 1964; Molm, 2003). Consequently, with a high emphasis on
economic exchange a company will try to maximize its proﬁts through contracted
budget targets that are most challenging for its managers and leave the least buffer
for the latter’s own consumption. Moreover, the performance expectations under
economic exchange are unambiguously stated and leave little scope for discretion,
thus further reducing a manager’s opportunity to build slack into the budget. For
these reasons, economic exchange is expected to reduce a manager’s creation of
slack. These expectations are in line with the wider literature in management
control,
which
maintains
that
rigid
budgetary
controls
decrease
slack-building behaviour (Van der Stede, 2000). They are also consistent with the
literature on budget negotiations. These studies show that the discretion that
arises from a negotiation situation leads to a signiﬁcantly higher degree of slack
than an imposed budget due to concessions that superiors make in order to
adhere to social norms (Fisher et al., 2000). Therefore, we expect the following
relationship:
H5:
Managers’ perceptions of economic exchange with their company decrease
the creation of budgetary slack.
We did not form speciﬁc hypotheses about other potential relationships. Instead,
we added control graphs to the model. Concerning the relationship between eco-
nomic and social exchange, we follow arguments from prior literature (Song et al.,
2009), which suggest that in a workplace setting, economic exchange provides the
foundation for social exchange in the sense that a formal deﬁnition of rights and
duties provide a stable economic exchange pattern which is complemented with
socio-emotional involvement over time. Thus, we add a control path from
economic to social exchange. We further control for performance effects that
may be induced by reductions in slack. Therefore, we add a control graph from
budgetary slack creation to managerial performance. Figure 1 depicts the concep-
tual model.
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
323
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

EMPIRICAL STUDY
We tested the hypotheses using data collected by a survey questionnaire, adminis-
tered to a cross-sectional convenience sample of 613 senior managers from German
companies who participated in prior survey studies. We closely followed the guide-
lines for survey research (Dillman et al., 2009) when designing the questionnaire and
performing the contact procedure. First, the managers were provided with a hand-
signed cover letter by regular mail including some background information about
the study, an assurance of conﬁdentiality and an invitation to participate.As a token
of appreciation and an incentive to participate, each respondent was offered a
summary of the ﬁndings and a donation of €10 to a charity organization of their
choice (cf. Danneels, 2008). Shortly after the letter was administered, the managers
were provided with a link to the web-based survey via e-mail.Three reminders were
sent in intervals of, on average, two weeks. The survey yielded 140 responses, of
which 127 responses were complete and thus used in the analysis, leading to an
effective ﬁnal response rate of 21%.A randomly drawn number of non-respondents
were contacted by telephone and asked about their motives for not participating in
the study. Reasons for non-response were time pressures, a general company policy
of not participating in survey studies, and a perceived lack of representativeness for
the subject under study (e.g., when the company did not have an institutionalized
budgeting process). A non-response bias test was performed comparing the
latent variable scores of the main variables (see below) from the ﬁrst 15% with the
last 15% of respondents (corresponding to an absolute n of 20 in each group). A
t-test comparing the differences in the corresponding groups showed no signiﬁcant
Figure 1
CONCEPTUAL MODEL
Social
exchange with
the company
(SocEx)
Economic
exchange with
the company
(EcEx)
Budgetary
slack creation
(Slack)
Managerial 
performance
(ManPer)
TD orientation in the 
issuance of guidelines
TD orientation in the 
development of the 
initial budget proposal 
TD orientation in the 
negotiation of the final 
budget 
H2:    -
H1:    +
H3:    -
H4:    +
H5:    -
ABACUS
324
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

differences at a threshold of p < 0.05, providing no evidence for non-response bias.
Tables 2 and 3 provide some descriptive statistics about respondents and companies’
characteristics.
Our theory predicts that managers will interpret their relationship with the ﬁrm as
a function of their experience with the structural design of the ﬁrm’s budgeting
process. Our focus lies on economic exchange and social exchange perceptions as
mediators of the relationship between the ﬁrm’s budget target-setting and
behavioural outcomes. While the TD/BU orientation is being decided upon at the
organizational level, managers experience its consequences at the individual level.
Social and economic exchange, slack creation, and performance are likewise
individual-level variables. All variables were measured as latent constructs with
reﬂective indicators. As most scales were derived from the extant literature but
worded in German, a translation–retranslation procedure was employed to establish
inter-language validity (Daniel and Reitsperger, 1991; Hartmann, 2005).
Table 2
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF SURVEYED COMPANIES
n
%
Company size
Number of employees
1–200
16
12.60
201–500
50
39.37
501–1,000
27
21.26
1,001–2,000
9
7.09
2,001+
25
19.69
Industry
Category
Metals
18
14.17
Mechanical engineering and automotive
18
14.17
Other service providers
13
10.24
Retail
13
10.24
Manufacture of paper products, publishing and printing
7
5.51
Transportation and logistics
7
5.51
Chemical products and mineral oil processing
5
3.94
Energy and water supply
6
4.72
Banking and insurance
5
3.94
Construction
4
3.15
Telecommunications and information technology
3
2.36
Food and consumer goods
3
2.36
Real estate
3
2.36
Textiles and clothing
2
1.57
Other
20
15.75
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
325
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

TD/BU orientation in the issuance of guidelines (reﬂecting the speciﬁcity of given
directives and expected target levels) was measured with a three-item scale. The
items were anchored from 1 to 5 with different meanings attributed to the anchors.
A sample item is: ‘The expectations of superior units regarding the budget target
levels of subordinate units are binding to a low degree and serve more as a guideline/
binding to a high degree and serve as a speciﬁc target’. A high score on this scale
reﬂects a TD orientation and a low score reﬂects a BU orientation.
TD/BU orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal (reﬂecting
the strictness of compliance enforcement of budget proposals with issued standards)
was measured with a three-item scale. The items were anchored from 1 to 5 with
different meanings attributed to the anchors. A sample item is: ‘Budget planning of
subordinate units is constrained by assumptions and directives issued by higher-level
authorities to a low/high degree’.A high score on this scale reﬂects a TD orientation
and a low score reﬂects a BU orientation.
TD/BU orientation in the budget negotiation (reﬂecting the rigidity of the nego-
tiation process) was likewise measured with a three-item scale. The items were
anchored from 1 to 5 with different meanings attributed to the anchors. A sample
item is:‘In the budgeting process, a high/low amount of time is scheduled for budget
negotiations and discussions’.A high score on this scale reﬂects aTD orientation and
a low score reﬂects a BU orientation.
Perceptions of social exchange with the company were measured using the eight-
item instrument developed by Shore et al. (2006). The instrument contains the
essential aspects of social exchange such as trust, socio-emotional involvement,
long-term orientation, open-ended exchange, and diffuse obligations as well as reci-
procity and mutual investments in the relationship. A sample item is: ‘My relation-
ship with my organization is based on mutual trust’. Scaling was maintained with a
Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
Perceptions of economic exchange with the company were likewise based on the
operationalization by Shore et al. (2006). As the items have been criticized for their
Table 3
RESPONDENTS’ DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
n
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Std. Dev.
Respondent proﬁle
Age
127
32
68
48.29
8.43
Industry tenure
127
48
16.39
8.78
Company tenure
1
48
14.61
9.02
Position tenure
1
29
8.28
5.79
Gender
Male
120
Female
6
n.a.
1
ABACUS
326
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

negative connotations, they were rephrased in a neutral tone for the course of this
study.2 The construct comprises an eight-item instrument with a scale from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). A sample item is: ‘In the relationship with
my company, the activities that are expected from me and the rewards I receive for
their accomplishment are clearly speciﬁed’.
Budgetary slack creation was measured with a ﬁve-item scale developed by Van
der Stede (2000). Because the original scale uses both ﬁve- and seven-point
anchored items, we standardized the scale to a ﬁve-point scale from 1 (strongly
disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).A sample item is:‘Budget targets have not caused me
to be particularly concerned with improving efﬁciency in my business unit’.
Perceived managerial performance was measured with a nine-item instrument
developed by Mahoney et al. (1963), capturing a subjective estimate of a manager’s
own capabilities in various dimensions. The scale ranged from 1 (very low perfor-
mance) to 5 (very high performance). A sample item asked for the rating of the
overall performance.
We employed the partial least squares (PLS) approach (Chin, 1998b; Tenenhaus
et al., 2005) to structural equation modelling to test the hypothesized effects. PLS
estimates the structural model, which involves paths between latent constructs that
are indirectly measured by multiple indicators, by using an iterative ordinary least
squares regression-like procedure. This procedure aims to maximize the explained
variance of the dependent variables and does not make distributional assumptions
about the variables (Chin, 1998b; Wold, 1982). Moreover, because the algorithm of
PLS proceeds iteratively and block-wise, it is particularly suited to smaller sample
sizes, such as in this study (Chin, 1998b; Wold, 1985).We use SmartPLS with the path
weighting scheme and case wise replacement for the calculations (Ringle et al.,
2005). A data analysis was performed to establish the validity and reliability of
measures and the appropriateness of the causal model (Hair et al., 2006). We fol-
lowed Hulland’s (1999) procedure, which suggests a sequential analysis of the mea-
surement and structural model.
The adequacy of the measurement model is assessed by analyzing the individual
item reliability, internal consistency, convergent validity, and discriminant validity of
the reﬂective constructs (Bagozzi, 1994; Fornell and Larcker, 1981; Hulland, 1999).
Individual item reliability is assessed by the factor loading of an item on its respec-
tive construct. Recommendations for satisfying levels of item reliability range from
0.71 to 0.4 (Chin, 1998b; Henseler et al., 2009; Nunnally and Bernstein, 1994). Inter-
nal consistency is measured by Dillon-Goldstein’s ρ (Tenenhaus et al., 2005). The
literature considers a threshold of 0.70 as a sufﬁcient level of reliability (Tenenhaus
et al., 2005). Convergent and discriminant validity of the constructs is assessed by the
average variance shared between a construct and its indicators, labelled ‘average
variance extracted’ (AVE) (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). To possess adequate con-
vergent validity, the AVE of each latent construct in the measurement model should
2
This approach addresses recent calls for a reconceptualization in a more neutral tone ‘[. . .] to facilitate
a deeper understanding of the role of economic exchange in employment approaches’ (Song et al.,
2009, p. 84).
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
327
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

exceed 0.50. This implies that the variance captured by each construct is not domi-
nated by measurement error (Vandenbosch, 1996). To satisfy the criteria for dis-
criminant validity, the AVE of each construct should be greater than the squared
correlations with any other construct, and the cross-loadings of all indicators should
be highest with the corresponding construct (Fornell and Larcker, 1981).
After the evaluation of the measurement model, the structural model was esti-
mated.The path coefﬁcients represent the strength and direction of the relationships
among the latent variables and can be interpreted as standardized beta coefﬁcients
of ordinary least square regressions (Henseler et al., 2009). In order to obtain the
standard errors of the path coefﬁcients, we employed a bootstrapping procedure
(Chin, 1998a; Davison and Hinkley, 2003). By dividing the path coefﬁcient by the
standard error obtained by the bootstrap, an empirical t-value is calculated, which
allows for an assessment of the signiﬁcance of the corresponding path coefﬁcient
(Chin, 1998b). We employed a bootstrap procedure with 2,000 replacements to
estimate statistical signiﬁcance of the parameters.We complemented the analysis by
calculating the R2-values, which represent the amount of variance in an endogenous
variable that is explained by the exogenous variables (Cohen, 1988). In addition, the
predictive validity of the parameter estimates was assessed using the Stone-Geisser
criterion Q2, which is calculated through a cross-validated redundancy index
(Geisser, 1974; Stone, 1974). Predictive relevance can be concluded from the model
if Q2 exceeds 0.
RESULTS
The results of the measurement model are summarized in Tables 4 to 7. Table 4
contains loadings, standard errors, t-statistics, the composite reliability, and the
average variance extracted from the reﬂective components of the measurement
model. Items that failed to exceed the threshold of 0.40 in their loading were
excluded from the subsequent analysis.
In sum, the results provide evidence of a satisfactory level of individual-item
reliability. Moreover, the composite reliability in the model exceeds 0.79 in all
cases. Convergent validity appears acceptable for all reﬂective constructs, as AVE
is greater than 0.50 in all cases. Discriminant validity of the reﬂective constructs is
presented in Tables 5 and 6. Table 5 shows that the diagonal elements, which rep-
resent the square roots of the AVEs of the respective constructs, exceed their
correlations with other constructs. Table 6 shows that the indicators load best
on their related construct. In sum, the results suggest satisfactory discriminant
validity.
Figure 2 provides a visualization of the statistical results of the structural model.
Table 7 summarizes the path coefﬁcients as well as the Q2 and R2-values of the
endogenous constructs.
Consistent with Hypothesis 1, a TD orientation in the issuance of guidelines and
thus a high speciﬁcity of given directives and expected target levels has a strong
signiﬁcant effect on managers’ perceptions of economic exchange (β = 0.313,
p < 0.001). Consistent with this theory, precise and explicit communication about the
ABACUS
328
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

target levels clarify mutual obligations and beneﬁts associated with the tangible
outputs that are expected of lower-level managers.
A BU orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal and thus a low
strictness of compliance enforcement of budget proposals with issued standards
Table 4
EVALUATION OF THE MEASUREMENT MODEL FOR REFLECTIVE COMPONENTS
Construct/Indicators
Loading
original sample
Loading sample
mean
Std.
error
T-statistic
(bootstrap)
Composite
reliability
(ρc)
Average variance
extracted
(AVE)
TD orientation in the issuance of guidelines (stage 1)
0.87
0.76
Item 1
0.90
0.89
0.04
22.60
Item 2
0.85
0.84
0.06
14.56
TD orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal (stage 2)
0.86
0.76
Item 2
0.87
0.85
0.10
9.07
Item 3
0.87
0.87
0.08
9.18
TD orientation in the budget negotiation (stage 3)
0.74
0.59
Item 1
0.84
0.76
0.21
3.71
Item 2
0.70
0.69
0.23
2.96
Economic exchange with the company (EcEx)
0.88
0.59
EcEx item 1
0.82
0.82
0.03
24.38
EcEx item 2
0.75
0.75
0.05
13.93
EcEx item 4
0.88
0.88
0.02
37.22
EcEx item 5
0.60
0.59
0.07
8.10
EcEx item 6
0.76
0.76
0.04
17.24
Social exchange with the company (SocEx)
0.89
0.55
SocEx item 1
0.76
0.75
0.05
14.08
SocEx item 2
0.81
0.81
0.04
19.47
SocEx item 3
0.74
0.74
0.04
19.22
SocEx item 4
0.65
0.65
0.06
10.64
SocEx item 5
0.84
0.83
0.03
28.26
SocEx item 7
0.66
0.66
0.08
8.62
SocEx item 8
0.70
0.70
0.07
10.00
Budgetary slack creation (Slack)
0.79
0.49
Slack item 2
0.74
0.73
0.08
9.59
Slack item 3
0.85
0.84
0.04
20.08
Slack item 4
0.63
0.63
0.11
5.76
Slack item 5
0.56
0.55
0.12
4.61
Managerial performance (ManPer)
0.82
0.53
ManPer item 4
0.67
0.67
0.07
9.22
ManPer item 5
0.77
0.77
0.06
14.12
ManPer item 6
0.73
0.72
0.06
12.28
ManPer item 9
0.73
0.73
0.06
12.34
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
329
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

increases social exchange perceptions (β = 0.159, p < 0.05), consistent with Hypoth-
esis 2. In line with our reasoning, the constraints of a TD orientation in this stage
imposed on lower-level managers seems to reduce feelings of recognition and per-
ceptions of unjust treatment, lowering overall social exchange perceptions.
According to Hypothesis 3, a BU orientation in the budget negotiation and thus
a low rigidity was expected to increase perceptions of social exchange.This, however,
is not the case. Instead, a BU orientation in this stage leaves social exchange per-
ceptions virtually unaffected (β = 0.051, not signiﬁcant). However, a BU orientation
directly decreases budgetary slack (β = −0.160, p < 0.05) and has a marginally
signiﬁcant positive effect on managerial performance (β = 0.154, p = 0.06).We think
that this unexpected result might be explained by the fact that lower-level managers
likely attributed a less rigid negotiation process to the goodwill of their supervisor
with whom they have their negotiation meetings. This goodwill may account for
increased motivation and subsequent performance and less propensity of the sub-
ordinate to build slack into the budget. Hypothesis 3, therefore, must be rejected.
Our data support Hypothesis 4, because social exchange increases managerial
performance (β = 0.240, p < 0.01) and Hypothesis 5, as economic exchange reduces
budgetary slack creation (β = −0.243, p < 0.01). Regarding the control variables,
budgetary slack has a negative and signiﬁcant effect (β = −0.241, p < 0.01) on
managerial performance.Thus, a high amount of slack in the budget is detrimental to
performance. R2 and Q2 of all endogenous constructs are satisfying.
Table 5
DISCRIMINANT VALIDITY COEFFICIENTS OF REFLECTIVE CONSTRUCTS AND LATENT
VARIABLE CORRELATIONS
TD-stage 1
TD-stage 2
TD-stage 3
EcEx
SocEx
Slack
ManPer
TD-stage 1
0.87
TD-stage 2
0.20
0.87
TD-stage 3
0.01
0.13
0.77
EcEx
0.34
0.18
−0.05
0.77
SocEx
0.11
−0.07
−0.10
0.58
0.74
Slack
−0.23
−0.17
0.17
−0.39
−0.29
0.70
ManPer
0.20
0.15
−0.21
0.33
0.35
−0.39
0.73
Mean
4.02
3.31
2.87
3.75
3.96
2.12
4.11
Std.dev.
0.72
0.77
0.93
0.75
0.64
0.64
0.48
Min
2.00
2.00
1.00
1.63
1.16
1.00
3.07
Max
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
Scaling
1–5
1–5
1–5
1–5
1–5
1–5
1–5
Each diagonal element (bold) is the square root of the variance shared between the construct and its
indicators (i.e., the square root of the AVE). Off-diagonal elements are the correlations among constructs.
For discriminant validity, diagonal elements should be larger than off-diagonal elements.
Latent variable coefﬁcients >= 0.17 are signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 (two-tailed).
ABACUS
330
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Most prior studies have focused on the concept of budgetary participation to explain
managerial responses to budgetary target setting, such as performance and slack
building. However, budgetary participation focuses on interactions within the
superior–subordinate dyad, but does not account for the wider budgetary process in
which these interactions are embedded. The purpose of this paper was thus to
Table 6
CROSS-LOADINGS OF INDICATORS
TD-stage 1a
TD-stage 2b
TD-stage 3c
EcEx
SocEx
Slack
ManPer
TD-stage 1 item 1
0.89
0.16
0.03
0.32
0.10
−0.22
0.18
TD-stage 1 item 2
0.85
0.20
−0.02
0.27
0.09
−0.18
0.16
TD-stage 2 item 2
0.22
0.87
0.14
0.16
−0.03
−0.12
0.17
TD-stage 2 item 3
0.14
0.87
0.09
0.15
−0.09
−0.17
0.09
TD-stage 3 item 1
−0.01
0.08
0.84
−0.09
−0.12
0.16
−0.14
TD-stage 3 item 2
0.03
0.14
0.70
0.04
−0.03
−0.10
−0.18
EcEx item 1
0.22
0.09
−0.12
0.82
0.53
−0.34
0.23
EcEx item 2
0.29
0.08
0.00
0.75
0.34
−0.16
0.18
EcEx item 4
0.26
0.13
−0.13
0.88
0.54
−0.35
0.34
EcEx item 5
0.24
0.09
0.07
0.60
0.38
0.14
0.18
EcEx item 6
0.31
0.27
0.04
0.76
0.40
−0.41
0.30
SocEx item 1
0.02
−0.07
0.06
0.41
0.76
−0.25
0.24
SocEx item 2
0.06
−0.08
0.07
0.35
0.81
−0.16
0.24
SocEx item 3
0.11
−0.08
−0.16
0.44
0.74
−0.31
0.31
SocEx item 4
0.12
0.09
−0.05
0.33
0.65
−0.07
0.33
SocEx item 5
0.13
−0.12
−0.18
0.53
0.84
−0.20
0.31
SocEx item 7
0.03
0.02
−0.06
0.45
0.66
−0.21
0.21
SocEx item 8
0.09
−0.06
−0.15
0.45
0.70
−0.28
0.19
Slack item 2
−0.21
−0.18
0.19
−0.25
−0.25
0.74
−0.30
Slack item 3
−0.23
−0.14
0.08
−0.40
−0.27
0.85
−0.38
Slack item 4
−0.10
−0.00
0.08
−0.16
−0.19
0.63
−0.20
Slack item 5
−0.04
−0.09
0.14
−0.20
−0.06
0.56
−0.16
ManPer item 4
0.16
0.18
−0.06
0.18
0.16
−0.30
0.67
ManPer item 5
0.15
0.12
−0.29
0.30
0.25
−0.28
0.77
ManPer item 6
0.11
0.13
−0.16
0.19
0.21
−0.18
0.73
ManPer item 9
0.15
0.03
−0.07
0.28
0.37
−0.36
0.73
a TD orientation in the issuance of guidelines.
b TD orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal.
c TD orientation in the budget negotiation.
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
331
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

conceptualize and measure the effect of the procedural aspects of budgetary target
setting on managerial behaviour. Based on ﬁeld data, we ﬁrst developed an opera-
tional deﬁnition of a TD or BU orientation across the different stages of the
budgeting process. Next, we used social exchange theory to hypothesize that a TD or
BU orientation affects managerial performance and slack through managers’
Table 7
STANDARDIZED PLS PARAMETER ESTIMATES OF THE STRUCTURAL MODEL AND
TEST FOR PREDICTIVE VALIDITY (OVERALL TOP-DOWN ORIENTATION)
Hypotheses
Path
coefﬁcient
Q2
R2
H1: TD-stage 1a →Economic exchange with the company (+)
0.313***
H2: TD-stage 2b →Social exchange with the company (−)
−0.159*
H3: TD-stage 3c→Social exchange with the company (−)
−0.051 n.s.
H4: Social exchange with the company →Managerial performance (+)
0.240**
H5: Economic exchange with the company →Budgetary slack creation (−)
−0.243**
Control graphs
TD-stage 1a →Social exchange with the company
−0.071 n.s.
TD-stage 1a →Managerial performance
0.076 n.s.
TD-stage 1a →Budgetary slack creation
−0.109 n.s.
TD-stage 2b →Economic exchange with the company
0.120 n.s.
TD-stage 2b →Managerial performance
0.121 n.s.
TD-stage 2b →Budgetary slack creation
−0.131 n.s.
TD-stage 3c →Economic exchange with the company
−0.051 n.s.
TD-stage 3c →Managerial performance
−0.154 n.s.
TD-stage 3c →Budgetary slack creation
0.160*
Economic exchange with the company →Social exchange with
the company
0.633***
Economic exchange with the company →Managerial performance
0.045 n.s.
Social exchange with the company →Budgetary slack creation
−0.134 n.s.
Budgetary slack creation →Managerial performance
−0.241**
Endogenous variables
Social exchange with the company
0.18
0.38
Economic exchange with the company
0.07
0.13
Budgetary slack creation
0.07
0.21
Managerial performance
0.11
0.26
a TD orientation in the issuance of guidelines
b TD orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal
c TD orientation in the budget negotiation
Signiﬁcance (two-tailed test, based on bootstrapping with 2000 replacements)
n.s. not signiﬁcant
* p < .05
** p < .01
*** p < .001
ABACUS
332
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

perceptions of social and economic exchange. Our ﬁndings suggest that a dominance
of TD budgeting characteristics enhances managers’ perceptions of an economic
exchange relationship with the ﬁrm, which results in lower budgetary slack. The
results further show that a dominance of BU budgeting characteristics in the devel-
opment of the initial budget and the negotiation of the ﬁnal budget enhances
managers’ perceptions of a social exchange relationship with the ﬁrm, which results
in higher (self-reported) performance.
Given these ﬁndings, the paper makes the following contributions to the litera-
ture. First, we developed and empirically conﬁrmed a TD and BU typology of the
budgeting process. This typology complements the literature’s focus on supervisor–
subordinate interactions by procedural characteristics in the target-setting process.
Second, we demonstrated that the effects of TD and BU on managerial performance
and budgetary slack are mediated by managerial perceptions of the social or eco-
nomic nature of the relationship with their company. From a practical perspective
our results indicate that companies need to pay attention to the implications of
designing budgetary processes. In particular, tight process designs as represented by
a strong TD orientation may be beneﬁcial in some stages while being detrimental in
others. In terms of theory, our ﬁndings suggest that process characteristics of target
setting can fruitfully complement the traditional perspective of budgetary partici-
pation in explaining budgetary outcomes.
Figure 2
VISUALIZATION OF THE STATISTICAL RESULTS
Significance (two-tailed test, based on bootstrapping with 2000 replacements)
------
not significant
*
p < .05
**
p < .01
***
p < .001
Social
exchange with
the company
(SocEx)
Economic
exchange with
the company
(EcEx)
Budgetary
slack creation
(Slack)
Managerial 
performance
(ManPer)
TD orientation in the 
issuance of guidelines
TD orientation in the 
development of the 
initial budget proposal 
TD orientation in the 
negotiation of the final 
budget 
0.313***
-0.159*
-0.051
0.240**
-0.243**
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
333
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

As with all studies that use the survey method, this study is not immune to
traditional limitations regarding internal and external validity.First,the nature of the
study requires care when interpreting the statistical associations obtained from
cross-sectional data as causal relationships (Van der Stede et al., 2006; Young, 1996).
Survey studies generally are also susceptible to common method bias (Podsakoff
et al., 2003). However, the thorough development of relationships from theory and
the careful data collection process mitigate concerns about alternative explanations
for the obtained results.
Second, although we made a systematic attempt to develop a comprehensive
operationalization of a TD/BU orientation in the respective stages of the budgeting
process, we cannot rule out the possibility that certain aspects of the typology have
not been accounted for.The unexpected results of the negotiation stage suggest that
the measurement of the process characteristics might be reﬁned in future studies.
Having stated that, however, the quality of the measurement model and the other
results of the structural model, which are in line with our theory, suggest that our
operationalization captured the major elements of TD and BU orientations in the
budgeting processes.
Third, our ﬁndings are based on a sample of German managers, and cultural
factors could be identiﬁed that may be speciﬁc to this sample and the budgetary
issues we observed (Farh et al., 2007).
Despite these limitations, we believe that the study provides a sound basis for
a new direction on research into the organizational and behavioural effects of
budgetary target setting. Future research may empirically reconﬁrm and reﬁne
our operationalization to improve our understanding of the theoretical properties
and practical relevance of TD and BU budgeting processes. Studies may also
investigate other organizational and managerial responses to a TD or BU orien-
tation, such as organizational justice perceptions or goal commitment. Such studies
could also investigate and compare whether the effect of management control
system design on the formation of social and economic exchange perceptions
differs across national cultures, for example in an Australian, American, or Asian
context. A more structured view on contextual or organizational antecedents
to TD/BU budgeting procedures is also warranted. Such a view may focus on
the organization’s external environment, its strategic positioning or different
degrees of information asymmetry within a company. Finally, an avenue for
further research lies in the application of social exchange theory to other
areas of management control, such as incentive contracts or performance
evaluation.
REFERENCES
Argyris, C. (1952), The Impact of Budgets on People, Controllership Foundation, Inc., New York.
Anthony, R. N. and V. Govindarajan (2007), Management Control Systems (12th ed.), McGraw-Hill/Irwin,
Chicago.
Bagozzi, R. P. (1994), ‘Structural Equation Models in Marketing Research: Basic Principles’, in
R. P. Bagozzi (ed.), Principles of Marketing Research, Blackwell, Cambridge, pp. 317–85.
ABACUS
334
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

Baiman, S. and J. H. Evans (1983), ‘Pre-decision Information and Participative Management Control
Systems’, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 371–95.
Baiman, S., J. H. May, and A. Mukherji (1990), ‘Optimal Employment Contracts and the Returns to
Monitoring in a Principal–Agent Context’, Contemporary Accounting Research, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp.
761–99.
Bies, R. J. and D. L. Shapiro (1988), ‘Voice and Justiﬁcation: Their Inﬂuence on Procedural Fairness
Judgments’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 676–85.
Bies, R. J., D. L. Shapiro, and L. L. Cummings (1988), ‘Causal Accounts and Managing Organizational
Conﬂict: Is It Enough to Say It’s Not My Fault?’, Communication Research, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp.
381–99.
Blau, P. M. (1964), Exchange and Power in Social Life, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Brownell, P. (1981),‘Participation in Budgeting, Locus of Control and Organizational Effectiveness’, The
Accounting Review, Vol. 56, No. 4, pp. 844–60.
—— (1982), ‘Participation in the Budgeting Process: When It Works and When It Doesn’t’, Journal of
Accounting Literature, Vol. 1, pp. 124–53.
Brownell, P. and M. McInnes (1986),‘Budgetary Participation, Motivation, and Managerial Performance’,
The Accounting Review, Vol. 61, No. 4, pp. 587–600.
Chen, Q. (2003), ‘Cooperation in the Budgeting Process’, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 41, No. 5,
pp. 775–96.
Chenhall, R. H. and P. Brownell (1988), ‘The Effect of Participative Budgeting on Job Satisfaction and
Performance: Role Ambiguity as an Intervening Variable’, Accounting, Organizations and Society,
Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 225–33.
Chin, W.W. (1998a),‘Commentary: Issues and Opinion on Structural Equation Modeling’, MIS Quarterly,
Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. vii–xvi.
——
(1998b), ‘The
Partial
Least
Squares
Approach
for
Structural
Equation
Modeling’,
in
G. A. Marcoulides (ed.), Modern Methods for Business Research, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
London, pp. 295–336.
Cohen, J. (1988), Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences (2nd ed.), Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc, Hillsdale, NJ.
Coyle-Shapiro, J. A.-M. and L. M. Shore (2007), ‘The Employee–Organization Relationship: Where Do
We Go from Here?’, Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 166–79.
Cropanzano,R. and M.S. Mitchell (2005),‘Social ExchangeTheory:An Interdisciplinary Review’,Journal
of Management, Vol. 31, No. 6, pp. 874–900.
Daniel, S. J. and W. D. Reitsperger (1991),‘Linking Quality Strategy with Management Control Systems:
Empirical Evidence from Japanese Industry’, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 16, No.
7, pp. 601–18.
Danneels, E. (2008),‘Organizational Antecedents of Second-order Competences’, Strategic Management
Journal, Vol. 29, No. 5, pp. 519–43.
Davison, A. C. and D. V. Hinkley (2003), Bootstrap Methods and their Application (2nd ed.), Cambridge
University Press, New York.
Derfuss, K. (2009), ‘The Relationship of Budgetary Participation and Reliance on Accounting
Performance Measures with Individual-level Consequent Variables: A Meta-Analysis’, European
Accounting Review, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 203–39.
Dillman, D. A., J. D. Smyth, and L. M. Christian (2009), Internet, Mail, and Mixed-mode Surveys:
The Tailored Design Method (3 ed.), John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Dunk, A. S. (1993), ‘The Effect of Budget Emphasis and Information Asymmetry on the Relation
between Budgetary Participation and Slack’, The Accounting Review, Vol. 68, No. 2, pp.
400–10.
Dunk, A. S. and H. Nouri (1998), ‘Antecedents of Budgetary Slack: A Literature Review and Synthesis’,
Journal of Accounting Literature, Vol. 17, pp. 72–96.
Eisenberger, R., S. Armeli, B. Rexwinkel, P. D. Lynch, and L. Rhoades (2001),‘Reciprocation of Perceived
Organizational Support’, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 86, No. 1, pp. 42–51.
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
335
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

Farh, J.-L., R. D. Hackett, and L. Liang (2007), ‘Individual-level Cultural Values as Moderators of
Perceived Organizational Support–Employee Outcome Relationships in China: Comparing the
Effects of Power Distance and Traditionality’, Academy of Management Journal,Vol. 50, No. 3, pp.
715–29.
Fisher, J. G., J. R. Frederickson, and S.A. Peffer (2000),‘Budgeting:An Experimental Investigation of the
Effects of Negotiation’, The Accounting Review, Vol. 75, No. 1, pp. 93–114.
—— (2002a), ‘The Effect of Information Asymmetry on Negotiated Budgets: An Empirical Investiga-
tion’, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 27, Nos 1–2, pp. 27–43.
—— (2006), ‘Budget Negotiations in Multi-period Settings’, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol.
31, No. 6, pp. 511–28.
Fisher, J. G., L. A. Maines, S. A. Peffer, and G. B. Sprinkle (2002b), ‘Using Budgets for Performance
Evaluation: Effects of Resource Allocation and Horizontal Information Asymmetry on Budget
Proposals, Budget Slack, and Performance’, The Accounting Review, Vol. 77, No. 4, pp. 847–65.
Fornell, C. and D. F. Larcker (1981), ‘Evaluating Structural Equation Models with Unobservable Vari-
ables and Measurement Error’, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 39–50.
Geisser, S. (1974), ‘A Predictive Approach to the Random Effect Model’, Biometrika, Vol. 61, pp. 101–7.
Govindarajan, V. (1986), ‘Impact of Participation in the Budgetary Process on Managerial Attitudes and
Performance: Universalistic and Contingency Perspectives’, Decision Sciences, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp.
496–516.
Hair, J. R. J., W. C. Black, B. J. Babin, R. E. Anderson, and R. L. Tatham (2006), Multivariate Data Analysis
(6th ed.), Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Hansen, S. C. and W. A. Van der Stede (2004), ‘Multiple Facets of Budgeting: An Exploratory Analysis’,
Management Accounting Research, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 415–39.
Hansen, S. C., D. T. Otley, and W. A. Van der Stede (2003), ‘Practice Developments in Budgeting:
An Overview and Research Perspective’, Journal of Management Accounting Research,Vol. 15, pp.
95–116.
Harrison, G. L. (1992),‘The Cross-cultural Generalizability of the Relation between Participation, Budget
Emphasis and Job Related Attitudes’, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp.
1–15.
Hartmann, F. (2005),‘The Effects of Tolerance for Ambiguity and Uncertainty on the Appropriateness of
Accounting Performance Measures’, Abacus, Vol. 41, No. 3, pp. 241–64.
Henseler, J., C. M. Ringle, and R. R. Sinkovics (2009), ‘The Use of Partial Least Squares Path Modeling
in International Marketing’, Advances in International Marketing, Vol. 20, pp. 277–319.
Horngren, C.T., S. M. Datar, G. Foster, M. Rajan, and C. D. Ittner (2009), Cost Accounting:A Managerial
Emphasis (Vol. 13), Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Hulland, J. (1999), ‘Use of Partial Least Squares (PLS) in Strategic Management Research: A Review of
Four Recent Studies’, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 195–204.
Kenis, I. (1979), ‘Effects of Budgetary Goal Characteristics on Managerial Attitudes and Performance’,
The Accounting Review, Vol. 54, No. 4, pp. 707–21.
Kono, T. (1976), ‘Long Range Planning—Japan–USA—A Comparative Study’, Long Range Planning,
Vol. 9, No. 5, pp. 61–71.
Kren, L. (1992), ‘Budgetary Participation and Managerial Performance: The Impact of Information and
Environmental Volatility’, The Accounting Review, Vol. 67, No. 3, pp. 511–26.
Kyj, L. and R. J. Parker (2008), ‘Antecedents of Budget Participation: Leadership Style, Information
Asymmetry, and Evaluative Use of Budget’, Abacus, Vol. 44, No. 4, pp. 423–42.
Lau, C. M. and C. Buckland (2001),‘Budgeting—The Role of Trust and Participation:A Research Note’,
Abacus, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 369–88.
Lau, C. M. and I. R. C. Eggleton (2003),‘The Inﬂuence of Information Asymmetry and Budget Emphasis
on the Relationship between Participation and Slack’, Accounting & Business Research, Vol. 33,
No. 2, pp. 91–104.
Lau, C. M. and S. L. C. Tan (2006), ‘The Effects of Procedural Fairness and Interpersonal Trust on Job
Tension in Budgeting’, Management Accounting Research, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 171–86.
ABACUS
336
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

Libby, T. (1999), ‘The Inﬂuence of Voice and Explanation on Performance in a Participative Budgeting
Setting’, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 125–37.
—— (2001), ‘Referent Cognitions and Budgetary Fairness: A Research Note’, Journal of Management
Accounting Research, Vol. 13, pp. 91–105.
Lorange, P. (1980). Corporate planning: An executive viewpoint. Prentice-Hall, Englewood-Cliffs, NJ.
Lorange, P. and R. F. Vancil (1977), Strategic Planning Systems, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Luft, J. L. and M. D. Shields (2003), ‘Mapping Management Accounting: Graphics and Guidelines for
Theory-consistent Empirical Research’, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 28, Nos 2–3,
pp. 169–249.
Mahoney, T. A., T. H. Jerdee, and S. J. Carroll (1963), Development of Managerial Performance:
A Research Approach, South Western, Cincinnati, OH.
Masterson, S. S., K. Lewis, B. M. Goldman, and M. S. Taylor (2000), ‘Integrating Justice and Social
Exchange: The Differing Effects of Fair Procedures and Treatment on Work Relationships’,
Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 43, No. 4, pp. 738–48.
Merchant, K. A. and W. A. Van der Stede (2012), Management Control Systems: Performance Measure-
ment, Evaluation, and Incentives (3 ed.), Prentice-Hall, London.
Milani, K. (1975), ‘The Relationship of Participation in Budget-setting to Industrial Supervisor Perfor-
mance and Attitudes: A Field Study’, The Accounting Review, Vol. 50, No. 2, pp. 274–84.
Molm, L. D. (2003),‘Theoretical Comparisons of Forms of Exchange’, Sociological Theory,Vol. 21, No. 1,
pp. 1–17.
Moorman, R. H., G. L. Blakely, and B. P. Niehoff (1998),‘Does Perceived Organizational Support Mediate
the Relationship between Procedural Justice and Organizational Citizenship Behavior?’,
Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 41, No. 3, pp. 351–57.
Nouri, H. and R. J. Parker (1998),‘The Relationship between Budget Participation and Job Performance:
The Roles of Budget Adequacy and Organizational Commitment’, Accounting, Organizations and
Society, Vol. 23, Nos 5–6, pp. 467–83.
Nunnally, J. C. and I. H. Bernstein (1994), Psychometric Theory (3rd ed.), McGraw-Hill, New York.
Podsakoff, P. M., S. B. Mackenzie, J. Y. Lee, and N. P. Podsakoff (2003), ‘Common Method Biases in
Behavioral Research:A Critical Review of the Literature and Recommended Remedies’, Journal
of Applied Psychology, Vol. 88, No. 5, pp. 879–903.
Rhoades, L. and R. Eisenberger (2002),‘Perceived Organizational Support:A Review of the Literature’,
Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 87, No. 4, pp. 698–714.
Ringle, C. M., S. Wende, and A. Will (2005), ‘SmartPLS 2.0 M3’, available at: www.smartpls.de, accessed
3 July 2014.
Rupp, D. E. and R. Cropanzano (2002), ‘The Mediating Effects of Social Exchange Relationships in
Predicting Workplace Outcomes from Multifoci Organizational Justice’, Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, Vol. 89, No. 1, pp. 925–46.
Settoon, R. P., N. Bennett, and R. C. Liden (1996), ‘Social Exchange in Organizations: Perceived Orga-
nizational Support, Leader–Member Exchange, and Employee Reciprocity’, Journal of Applied
Psychology, Vol. 81, No. 3, pp. 219–27.
Shields, J. F. and M. D. Shields (1998), ‘Antecedents of Participative Budgeting’, Accounting, Organiza-
tions and Society, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 49–76.
Shields, M. D. (2005), ‘Operating Budgets and Budgeting – Beneﬁts and Costs’, in L. R. Weil and
M. W. Maher (eds), Handbook of Cost Management (2nd ed.), John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Shore, L. M., L. E. Tetrick, P. Lynch, and K. Barksdale (2006), ‘Social and Economic Exchange:
Construct Development and Validation’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, Vol. 36, No. 4,
pp. 837–67.
Song, L. J., A. S. Tsui, and K. S. Law (2009),‘Unpacking Employee Responses to Organizational Exchange
Mechanisms: The Role of Social and Economic Exchange Perceptions’, Journal of Management,
Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 56–93.
Stone, M. (1974), ‘Cross Validity Choice and Assessment of Statistical Predictions’, Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Vol. 36, pp. 111–33.
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
337
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

Takeuchi, R., D. P. Lepak, H. Wang, and K. Takeuchi (2007), ‘An Empirical Examination of the Mecha-
nisms Mediating Between High-performance Work Systems and the Performance of Japanese
Organizations’, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 92, No. 4, pp. 1069–83.
Tenenhaus, M., V. E. Vinzi, Y.-M. Chatelin, and C. Lauro (2005), ‘PLS Path Modeling’, Computational
Statistics & Data Analysis, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 159–205.
Töpfer, A. (1978), ‘Corporate Planning and Control in German Industry’, Long Range Planning, Vol. 11,
No. 1, pp. 59–68.
Umapathy, S. (1987), Current Budgeting Practices in the U.S. Industry: The State of the Art, Greenwood
Press, Westport.
Van der Stede, W. A. (2000), ‘The Relationship between Two Consequences of Budgetary Controls:
Budgetary Slack Creation and Managerial Short-term Orientation’, Accounting, Organizations
and Society, Vol. 25, No. 6, pp. 609–22.
Van der Stede, W.A., M. S. Young, and C. Xiaoling Chen (2006),‘Doing Management Accounting Survey
Research’, in C. S. Chapman, A. Hopwood, and M. D. Shields (eds), Handbook of Management
Accounting Research, Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 445–78.
Vandenbosch, M. B. (1996), ‘Conﬁrmatory Compositional Approaches to the Development of Product
Spaces’, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 30, pp. 23–46.
Wagner, J. A. (1994), ‘Participation’s Effects on Performance and Satisfaction: A Reconsideration of
Research Evidence’, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 312–30.
Wayne, S. J., L. M. Shore, and R. C. Liden (1997),‘Perceived Organizational Support and Leader–Member
Exchange: A Social Exchange Perspective’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 40, No. 1,
pp. 82–111.
Wentzel, K. (2002), ‘The Inﬂuence of Fairness Perceptions and Goal Commitment on Managers’ Perfor-
mance in a Budget Setting’, Behavioral Research in Accounting, Vol. 14, pp. 247–71.
Wold, H. (1982), ‘Systems Under Indirect Observation Using PLS’, in C. Fornell (ed.), A Second
Generation of Multivariate Analysis (Vol. 1), Praeger Publishers, New York, pp. 325–47.
—— (1985),‘Systems Analysis by Partial Least Squares’, in P. Nijkamp, L. Leitner, and N. Wrigley (eds),
Measuring the Unmeasureable, Marinus Nijhoff, Dordrecht, pp. 221–51.
Young, S. M. (1985),‘Participative Budgeting:The Effects of Risk Aversion and Asymmetric Information
on Budgetary Slack’, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 829–42.
—— (1996), ‘Survey Research in Management Accounting: A Critical Assessment’, in A. J. Richardson
(ed.), Research Methods in Accounting,The Canadian General Accountants Research Foundation,
Vancouver, pp. 55–68.
ABACUS
338
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

APPENDIX
SURVEY ITEMS
Top-down/bottom-up orientation in the issuance of guidelines (reﬂecting the speciﬁcity of given
directives and expected target levels) / Scale from 1 to 5
1. The expectations of superior units regarding the budget target levels of subordinate units are
relevant for the budgeting process (1: to a low degree / 5: to a high degree).
2. The expectations of superior units regarding the budget target levels of subordinate units are
(1: binding to a low degree and serve more as a guideline) / (5: binding to a high degree and serve
as a speciﬁc target).
3. Managers from subordinate units are involved in the formation of expectations for their budget
targets (1: to a high degree) / (5: to a low degree). (*)
Top-down/bottom-up orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal (reﬂecting the
strictness of compliance enforcement of budget proposals with issued standards) / Scale from 1 to 5
1. In the budgeting process the subordinate units create their budget proposals (1: based on data from
their own business) / (5: based on the input of their superior units). (*)
2. In the budget planning process subordinate units are allowed to deviate from directives given by
superior units (1: to a high degree) / (5: to a low degree).
3. Budget planning of subordinate units is constrained by assumptions and directives issued by
higher-level authorities (1: to a low degree) / (5: to a high degree).
Top-down/bottom-up orientation in the budget negotiation (reﬂecting the rigidity of the negotiation
process) / Scale from 1 to 5
1. In the budgeting process (1: a high amount of time is scheduled for budget negotiations and
discussions) / (5: a low amount of time is scheduled for budget negotiations and discussions).
2. During the budget negotiation (1: the budget proposal of the subordinate unit is presented ﬁrst
which is subsequently challenged by the superior unit) / (5: the budget expectation of the superior
unit is presented ﬁrst which is subsequently challenged by the subordinate unit).
3. The ﬁnal budgets are based on budget discussions that (1: rather rest on cost and revenue data of
the operational units) / (5: rather rest on global data, e.g., inﬂation, commodity prices, peer
benchmarks and economic growth). (*)
Social exchange with the company / Scale from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly agree)
1. My relationship with my company is based on mutual trust.
2. I try to look out for the best interests of my company because I can rely on my organization to take
care of me.
3. The things I do on the job today will beneﬁt my standing in the company in the long run.
4. My company has made a signiﬁcant investment in me.
5. I don’t mind working hard today – I know I will eventually be rewarded by my company.
6. Even though I may not always receive the recognition I deserve from my company, I know my
efforts will be rewarded in the future. (*)
7. There is a lot of give and take in my relationship with my organization.
8. I worry that all my efforts on behalf of my organization will never be rewarded. (RC)
TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING
339
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

APPENDIX
CONTINUED
Economic exchange with the company / Scale from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly agree)
1. In the relationship with my company, the activities that are expected from me and the rewards I
receive for accomplishing them are clearly speciﬁed.
2. The relationship with my company is economic, which implies that I fulﬁl the activities that are
expected of me and in exchange I am adequately rewarded.
3. In the relationship with my company, monetary or tangible rewards are more important to me than
praise and recognition. (*)
4. In the relationship with my company mutual obligations are clearly speciﬁed.
5. I am aware that the relationship with my company is based on mutuality.
6. In my company, deadlines and timeframes of mutual obligations and returns are clearly deﬁned.
7. In my company, I rely on explicit statements rather than implicit promises. (*)
8. In the relationship with my company, foreseeable rewards and beneﬁts are more important to me
than prospective ones. (*)
Budgetary slack creation / Scale from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly agree)
1. I succeed in submitting budgets that are easily attainable. (*)
2. Budget targets induce high productivity in my business unit. (RC)
3. Budget targets require costs to be managed carefully in my business unit. (RC)
4. Budget targets have not caused me to be particularly concerned with improving efﬁciency in my
business unit.
5. Overall, the budget is very easy to attain.
Managerial performance / Scale from 1 (Very low performance) to 5 (Very high performance)
Please rate your performance on the following activities:
1. Planning (*)
2. Investigating (*)
3. Coordinating (*)
4. Evaluating
5. Supervising
6. Stafﬁng
7. Negotiating (*)
8. Representing (*)
9. Overall performance
(RC): Reverse coded items.
(*): Items that were deleted after scale puriﬁcation.
ABACUS
340
© 2014 The Authors
Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney

Copyright of Abacus is the property of Wiley-Blackwell and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written
permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

