---
title: "Chapter 6 to Print or not to print that is the question"
date: 2024-05-24
source_file: "Documents\Chapter 6 to Print or not to print that is the question.docx"
source_type: docx
tags: [learning]
area: Resources
status: active
confidence: 0.8
imported: 2026-05-14
---

# 5. Recommendations for BLH to Enter the German Market
After bringing together our research findings and providing answers to the research questions, we now shift our focus to the broader management question raised in Chapter 1. Chapter 5 will address the overarching management question and incorporate our findings into recommendations. This chapter will also make recommendations for future studies and provide actionable insights for BLH, ensuring that our findings are not just academically sound but also useful.
The management question arising from prior research, defining on how BLH can optimize its strategy for entering the German market to strengthen its white-label positioning, has been demonstrated to consist of three components: Growth Pathways, Partnership Selection, and Risk Assessment. All components relied primarily on interviews to come to the advice.
## 5.1 Growth Pathways
This section focuses on the form and manner of growth when addressing the management question. We found that TPWLOs are in essence a commodity (the same), sharing basic business models, the differences between them are based are three things: market focus, brand alignment and local flexibility (EXP_01, EXP_02, EXP_04, DEV_04, HCS_04, INV_01, INV_02, INV_03, CNS_03, CNS_05).
The ability to adapt and strategical positioning contribute to the company's effectiveness within the German market. BLH want to expand into Germany with no clear indications of where and how the growth will take place, our data shows that their scope is too big, and they should narrow down their focus to 3, 4, or 5 provinces of Germany. To illustrate, North-Rhine Westfalen, a province in West-Germany, has more citizens than The Netherlands as a whole and when looking at landmass it is in fact smaller. Advice derived from primary research is filtering down and focusing on minor quantities of regions. Local knowledge is of great importance in projects, and it has been shown that due to the size of Germany and the diversities between provinces it is difficult to maintain an overview to grow properly and steadily. Focusing on specific regions can help BLH maintain a good reputation and create financial stability, thereby gaining trust. Another component within growth is hiring local talent, increasing success rate, this will be further explained in the section Risk Assessment.
Starting in A/B or B/C locations is still a point of discussion among stakeholders, with A/B locations being preferable for brand awareness (DEV_02, INV_01). And B/C cities are more economical in some cases, due to less popularity in these places, construction, refurbishment and conversion costs are blatantly lower (HCS_03, DEV_03). Carefully managing leverage is essential, using funds to increase growth and maximize following profits. When using debt to finance your assets, BLH can attract more capital and expand their investment opportunities (DEV_01). Finding a balance between risk and return is of great importance since too much debt can influence BLH’s financial stability negatively. Stakeholders, including investors, owners and hotel chains, have differing views on focusing on A/B versus B/C cities, as will be further explained in Partnership Selection.
Conversions and flexibility in accepting various projects are crucial for growth. It became clear that conversion projects, when opportunity presents itself, are a good foundation for growth. There are severe restrictions on building hotels from scratch, in addition, construction costs are extremely high, especially in the A/B cities due to high demand and complicated supply chains (HCS_01, DEV_01). Since German A/B cities are already quite congested and the good locations in these are tenanted, BLH can still grow using conversions (DEV_01, HCS_01, COM_01, COM_02). It has been found that besides old and/or inoperable hotels, many old office buildings are also often converted into new hotels, this approach also remains more appealing to investors (DEV_01).
With regards, to other niches when looking to optimize growth opportunities, the long-stay market has been identified as a growing niche (INV_01, COM_02). Although some stakeholders believe this market is justified (EXP_01, DEV_01), renting an apartment or house is not as economical as it used to be considering the locations and facilities hotels have to offer. From most interviews, it became clear that dual branding is not advisable for BLH, unless in niche and or rare cases with long-stay in A, and (sometimes) B locations.
## 5.2 Partnership Selection
Hotel brands select a specific third-party white label operator (TPWLO) based on several crucial considerations. Trust is paramount in these relationships; therefore, hotel chains look for trustworthy, reliable partners with deep industry understanding (HCS_04; HCS_05; EXP_02; EXP_03). Establishing transparency and openness is essential to create a strong foundation for trust with potential hotel chain partners. It is advised that TPWLOs provide regular updates on project progress and financial health to help maintain trust and demonstrate reliability (HCS_03; COM_02). Additionally, demonstrating a comprehensive knowledge of the hospitality market enhances the appeal to hotel chains seeking knowledgeable partners (HCS_03; COM_02).
Financial health and transparency are critical factors in the selection process. Hotel chains prefer TPWLOs with solid financial standing to mitigate operational risks (CNS_03; DEV_03). TPWLOs should maintain financial transparency by providing detailed and transparent financial statements to reassure potential partners of their reliability (HCS_03, Page 4; COM_02, Page 3; DEV_02, Page 4). Highlighting financial stability and the ability to manage risks further ensures hotel chains of TPWLO’s capability to handle operational challenges (HCS_03; COM_02; DEV_02). It is recommended to conduct regular financial audits and share results to further prove financial integrity, while developing and presenting comprehensive risk management plans to reassure hotel chains of preparedness. BLH currently has positive financial health, which makes it attractive for hotel chains and investors. BLH should leverage this advantage in negotiations with relevant stakeholders.
The loyalty and exclusivity between TPWLOs and hotel chains significantly influence how projects are distributed. Exclusive affiliations enhance market visibility and reliability, as investors gain more confidence (INV_03, Page 5) in a TPWLO affiliated in some sort of exclusivity with a major hotel chain. Such arrangements demonstrate that brands have thoroughly researched and identified the best investors, providing comfort to stakeholders (INV_03). TPWLOs often prefer exclusive contracts because they ensure that the TPWLO will exert considerable effort in the partnership. However, exclusivity can limit growth potential by restricting the number of brands TPWLO can work with (HCS_03).
Balancing exclusivity with flexibility is crucial. While exclusivity can help capture initial orders and investors’ trust, finding appropriate levels of flexibility for future engagements is equally important. This flexibility allows TPWLOs to engage in various opportunities and respond to market dynamics, although it may complicate the management of multiple brand standards (CNS_04). Therefore, loyalty and exclusivity should be employed in a way that maximizes growth and maintains a competitive edge. It is advisable to use exclusivity strategically to secure high-value partnerships without overcommitting, and to craft agreements that allow for periodic review and adjustment to meet evolving market conditions (CNS_04, Page 9; HCS_03, Page 4).
Hotel brands also consider the strategic positioning of projects. Chains usually prefer projects with higher visibility and brand awareness in central locations (EXP_01; EXP_02, Page 6). Aligning the project’s location with the hotel's marketing strategy is vital for mutual success. Providing tailored financial solutions that address the specific needs and goals of each hotel chain partner can further enhance the partnership. Additionally, conducting competitive analysis to understand and meet the unique requirements of different hotel brands is crucial (COM_01, Page 8).
The secondary conditions provided by brands to TPWLOs vary significantly, especially regarding key money structures and franchise agreements, which are essential in determining financial prospects and strategic positioning (EXP_02; INV_03). Contractual strategies vary by geographic location and brand strategy. For example, flat lease contracts are common in Germany, while hybrid lease contracts are more popular in the Netherlands (EXP_02). Mixed leasing contracts, which include turnover or profit-related components, are increasingly used in Germany to manage environmental risks such as COVID-19 and high-interest rates (INV_03; CNS_03; CNS_04).
Financial considerations and decision-making processes differ across brands. Key money is critical in business development, reflecting the contract value and future partnership potential (DEV_01). Funding is typically allocated according to project requirements, indicating strategic financial planning (HCS_04). However, key money can be a costly form of growth financing. Hotel operators should carefully consider whether a bank loan might be more advantageous than key money, as key money will lead to increased franchise fees (HCS_04). Franchise agreements represent a long-term investment and result in high ongoing fees.
## 5.3 Risk Assessment
When looking at the management question through this component the focus lays on the risks of expanding to Germany. When aiming for growth and expansion risks are obviously involved these must be considered and evaluated carefully. There are various indicators that signify ‘unhealthy’ growth, such as not having enough resources for the expansion, not having enough knowledgeable employees in the right place (INV_01, HCS_03). Interviewees emphasized the need to manage the resources and adjusting structures. The German market is culturally very different than The Netherlands, therefore BLH should outsource HR to local parties with the knowledge of the local market. Here you can avoid hiring the wrong people, that are potentially unqualified due to lack of cultural adaptations. Furthermore, it is important to maintain a balance between the open and pipelined hotels, to ensure proper cashflow (HCS_06). Here it is also important to mention that open hotels are not directly stable, attention should be given to the FSY (first stable year) which is in (most cases) 4 years after opening. This must be done through creating and monitoring KPIs that indicate cashflow and cash burn.
When reaping the rewards of strategic alliances also challenges are involved. They can be difficult to form if there is no knowledge about the financial and/or credibility perceptions of the relevant stakeholders. To minimize risks, market knowledge is highly requisite, making outsourcing of local talent highly advisable.
When expanding into Germany some major cultural integration issues for TPWLOs arise. The importance of speaking the German language, understanding the local culture and the necessity of strategic planning is emphasized (EXP_01, EXP_02, COM_01, COM_02, DEV_01, DEV_02, INV_03). Therefore, referring to the world of outsourcing, BLH should insert hiring local talent, ensuring local knowledge and expertise within discerning projects. These local talents can also help maintain and build the relations	hip with the German stakeholders.
## 5.4 Recommendations BLH
In the following subchapter, the link will be made from the three parted answers to the management question to concrete advice for BLH themselves. Our advice boils down to ten points.
First, BLH should acknowledge that, while TPWLOs in the German market share fundamental business concepts, operational effectiveness and strategic differentiation are critical to success. Currently, the market is saturated, therefore BLH should concentrate on conversion projects. In order to stand out, the company must use its strengths in adaptability and strategic positioning.
Next, BLH should concentrate its efforts on 3-5 key provinces, such as North-Rhine Westfalen, which has a significant population and economic activity similar to an entire country like the Netherlands. This more tailored approach will enable BLH to successfully manage resources and establish a strong reputation in these regions.
Moving on to the hiring of employees, outsourcing HR and finance to local professionals will reduce errors and promote cultural integration. By using local knowledge and expertise, this method will reduce the hiring of unqualified individuals while increasing operational efficiency.
Fourth, BLH should prioritize conversion projects above new development. Converting existing office buildings and dysfunctional hotels into new hotels is a cost-effective growth strategy that appeals to investors. This technique is consistent with the high demand and limited availability of excellent locations in Germany.
Building upon this, choosing between A/B and B/C cities requires a deliberate strategy. A/B locations increase brand visibility, however, B/C cities are more cost-effective due to cheaper construction and refurbishment costs. Given the congestion and high prices in A/B cities, BLH should prioritize conversions here. While still being open to new builds in B/C cities for a more economical approach.
Sixth, the long-stay market is a growing sector that BLH should pursue. Although some stakeholders are dubious, the benefits of long-stay hotels in terms of location and amenities make them a potential growth opportunity. Dual branding should be limited to specialized circumstances, this being when long-stay is involved in an A and (sometimes) B location.
Furthermore, BLH should prioritize developing solid, trustworthy connections with hotel chains. Financial stability and transparency are crucial considerations. Regular updates on project development and financial health will help to build confidence and reliability. Balancing exclusivity and flexibility in collaborations will allow BLH to acquire high-value contracts without overcommitting to one single chain.
When looking at finance, effective resource management and the adjustment of internal structures are critical. BLH should maintain financial stability by regularly monitoring KPIs for cash flow and cash burn. Maintaining a balance of open and pipelined hotels ensures consistent cash flow and operational stability.
To tackle cultural integration issues, BLH should focus on hiring local talent and learning about local company culture. Local workers will assist with navigating cultural differences and developing strong relationships with German stakeholders.
Lastly, key money should be strategically used to secure desirable projects and locations. BLH must carefully consider whether key money or regular financing options, such as bank loans, are more profitable for each project, as obtaining key money may worsen franchise fee negotiations. This approach will result in effective financial planning and growth.
By focusing on these key areas, BLH can optimize its strategy for entering the German market, ensuring a strong white-label positioning.
