---
title: "BLH chatper 4 and 5 results"
date: 2024-05-28
source_file: "Documents\BLH chatper 4 and 5 results.docx"
source_type: docx
tags: [learning]
area: Resources
status: active
confidence: 0.8
imported: 2026-05-14
---

# Chapter 4. Results
In this chapter, we aim to amalgamate all results into coherent answers to the research questions formulated in Chapter 2. The answers to the research questions that will be discussed in this chapter will be the foundation for the advice that will be given to BLH in chapter 5.
## 4.1 Determinizing whether a TPWLO is a pack of sugar or a Rolex
The presence of numerous established hotel operators that frankly offer the same service to the guest, calls the extent to which TPWLOs differ into doubt. Stakeholders frequently face the issue of identifying unique value propositions in a homogeneous market. Is a TPWLO fundamentally a commodity, with operators providing nearly identical services, or is there considerable differentiation that affects strategic and operational effectiveness? The research provides a nuanced viewpoint. While TPWLO’s have strong commodity features in their basic business models and operational frameworks, strategic differentiation based on market focus, brand alignment, and local flexibility provides points of uniqueness by combining commodity and differentiated product traits.
### 4.1.1 Core Business Model
The analysis provides a nuanced view of whether TPWLOs are commodities or differentiated products. According to most respondents, TPWLOs have significant commodity features and little distinction amongst operators. A consultant stated "Essentially, they are the same,"(CNS_05, Page 2). A different consultant emphasized the importance of economic scale, citing the operators' quick scaling and established market presence as truly important (CNS_03). This viewpoint was shared by an industry expert, who explained that there is not much differentiation between TPWLOs (EXP_02). Other consultants noted that TPWLO’s are largely commodities, distinguished by their size and capital structures (CNS_03). Referring to the Competitive Analysis in chapter 2, the sizes among TPWLO’s within Germany differ substantially. It varies greatly what they are looking for per stakeholder, some like to work with a small party and others with a larger one. Capital structures usually vary per TPWLO as well, looking at the flexibility of management contracts, scalability and business plans.
### 4.1.2 Operational Effectiveness
There are minor differences in operational performance amongst TPWLOs that indicate significant differences, although a good track record is of great importance for most stakeholders to consider the best option(s) when choosing a TPWLO.
An expert from a large hotel chain emphasized the significance of brand and location synergy (EXP_03). Several responders acknowledge this sentiment, citing TPWLOs' particular adaptation to local surroundings (HCS_05, EXP_01). Furthermore, a hotel chain stresses the necessity of matching objectives and building trust within franchise agreements, citing various operational methods depending on customer needs and local market realities (HCS_05).
### 4.1.3 Strategic Differentiation
Strategic differentiation is more prominent among TPWLOs. A consultant from a notable firm and other respondents observed variations in market positioning and expansion prospects, underlining the importance of strategic goals and market emphasis (CNS_05). For example, a different consultant noted that Black Label Hospitality concentrates on the luxury and lifestyle areas, whereas German operators choose to target the mid-scale category (CNS_04). This states how BLH is perceived in the market and how they differ from their competitors. This strategic focus is reinforced by a competitor, who points out that different TPWLOs concentrate on distinct niches, such as limited-service hotels vs larger, more monumental sites (COM_01). Furthermore, a different hotel chain noted, "There are white label operators that focus on A locations and those that specifically target B and C locations," emphasizing the need for strategic location differences (HCS_04).
## 4.2 Competition within the market
Previous research has revealed that the German hotel industry is characterized by substantial competition amongst TPWLO’s. To gain deeper insights on how this competition positions itself, stakeholders were questioned on their perspectives with regards to the TPWLO competition within the German market. Most stakeholders have acknowledged that there is a sufficient supply of TPWLOs currently. However, their choice ultimately depends on the suitability of the projects. The competition tends to vary across different scales. Most competition revolves around conversions, since new construction currently faces challenges due to high costs and limitations regarding funding. TPWLO proactivity and presence is of great importance as both hotel chains and owners/investors exhibit this. Financial considerations play a crucial role, since stakeholders prioritize primary and secondary conditions, emphasizing financial harmonization between parties.
### 4.2.1 Market Dynamics
In the conducted exploratory research in Chapter 2, it has become clear that the German market is rather saturated. It was made clear by various stakeholders that the current German market does not lack TPWLOs (COM_02; HSC_06; CNS_05). A consultant even stated, “I think that there is enough supply in terms of white label operators at the moment.” (CNS_05, page 4). This does not alter the fact that stakeholders will always choose the TPWLO they feel is most appropriate for their project. A large hotel chain mentioned that within Germany, the higher scale segment experiences less fierce competition; “If we look at the high end of the scale like luxury hotels and upper upscale hotels, there is only a handful of operators who are able and willing to run hotels in that segment and franchise with us or with other brands in that segment.” (HSC_03, page 3) and “The lower you go down in the scale, the wider the spread of operators there is and the fiercer potentially also the competition” (HSC_03, page 3). The same hotel chain also mentioned that most competition is based on conversions. Since new build construction is reduced, due to high construction costs and lack of funding on the development side, TPWLOs are in high demand for conversions and refurbishments (HSC_03; HSC_06).
### 4.2.2 Strategic Position
For stakeholders to engage with a particular TPWLO there is one major point to get ahead of competition, states quoted “There is movement in some doing better than others.” (DEV_04, page 3). For a party choosing a TPWLO, awareness is of importance. BLH must be present and active within the market to attain projects. Hotel chains seem to be more inclined to partner with such TPWLOs, like stated by one of the prominent hotel chains “There is the image of the wild ones who run around make quick offers, aggressive offers, offers on everything and are a bit chaotic.” (HSC_04, page 3). Parties require a feeling of passion from the TPWLO before going into business, but good performance is extremely important for stakeholders. Overindulging is a risk BLH must take into consideration, besides passion, interest is aroused when there is experience and a good track record of the relevant TPWLO (DEV_01, page 1).
### 4.2.3 Lease Agreements and financial structures
For stakeholders, financial aspects remain very important in closing deals. Outside of the above aspects, parties are not willing to accrue infinite costs, so as a TPWLO, primary and secondary conditions in terms of financial structures and lease agreements should also be considered. Hotel chains and owners/investors look at this matter from various perspectives, for the chains identify the differences in key money and allowance agreements apropos TPWLOs which will be further elaborated on in chapter 4.7. An owner/Investor is more interested in long-term leases, the more permanent the better, as stated by a well-known investor and developer (INV_02, DEV_01). An Industry expert with experience in both hotel investments and hotel development stated “No, I think it naturally becomes interesting for the guest property owner again by adding another one. Because ultimately, they are always played against each other. But then everyone comes with the rent they want to pay, and then ultimately the property owner thinks, well, I'll take the one that is the most financially solid with a good brand on it for the rest.” This implies that the complete financial framework is important for hotel chains, developers and investors/owners choosing a specific TPWLO.
## 4.3 First steps for Market Expansion
Expanding into the German market presents opportunities and challenges for TPWLOs, requiring a smart approach to ensure success. Industry experts, competitors, and consultants highlight the importance of understanding local market dynamics, securing trustworthy partnerships, and managing operational and financial logistics. Missteps in these areas can lead to financial loss and reputational damage. Given these challenges, the first steps a TPWLO should take when expanding to Germany are acquiring extensive local knowledge, hiring responsive and active leadership, outsourcing HR and finance to local experts, establishing trust with local landlords, forming strategic plans with hotel chains, evaluating real estate opportunities for conversion, conducting feasibility studies, focusing on prominent cities, and building strong networks through industry events. Furthermore, providing financial stability through well-structured financial strategies and upholding a good reputation are critical for obtaining the trust of local stakeholders. Effective market presence and exposure at industry events strengthen the company's position and lead to new prospects. This is a step most stakeholders noted, although this step is not considered as a first step when entering the German market, this will have to come from a good track record and reliable partners within the German market in the future.
### 4.3.1 Human Resources and Market Expansion
To successfully enter the German market, TPWLOs must emphasize gaining a thorough understanding of local market dynamics and hiring professionals with German market expertise. Competitors and industry experts underline the necessity of having a responsive and active CEO who is well-known and quick to respond in order to ensure smooth operations and growth (HSC_04). Furthermore, outsourcing HR and finance to local expertise is essential for navigating the complexity of the German market (INV_01). Building confidence with local landlords and establishing a strong presence in the German market are equally important first stages (HSC_06).
### 4.3.2 Operational and Financial Management
Operational and financial management are critical for effective market entry. To ensure strong collaborations, industry experts propose developing strategic plans with two to three hotel chains (HSC_06). Financial talks require a focus on rent, indexation, and guarantees, as well as an understanding of the company's setup. Evaluating real estate options for conversions rather than new buildings can result in financial savings and faster market entry (HSC-04). A good reputation and a sustainable financial strategy are essential for ensuring that the operator is viewed as trustworthy and financially secure (HSC_04, HSC_03).
### 4.3.3 Strategic Market Positioning
Strategic market positioning necessitates extensive market research and strategic entrance preparation. Conducting feasibility studies, emphasizing local knowledge, and employing local teams are critical for understanding market dynamics and achieving early success (CNS_05, COM_01). Experts advise beginning in significant cities (A or B locations) and considering MICE and leisure categories to develop a strong market presence (DEV_02, INV_03). Networking and visibility at industry events such as Expo Real and IHF are also essential for making relationships and expanding market presence (INV_02, INV_03). Forming strategic alliances and focusing on important opportunities can help to improve market positioning (DEV_01, COM_02).
## 4.4 Emerging Niches
By understanding the German market, TPWLO’s like BLH are able to identify niches to resonate with the demand. The question here remains, what are the top emerging niches in the German market? For a successful market entry capitalizing on niches is a great opportunity for growth, from the interviews conducted three selective codes have emerged that represent the relevant niches for BLH. The top emerging niches in the German market that are identified and confirmed are long stay and conversions.
### 4.4.1 Long Stay Market Dynamics
Key outcomes that have surfaced are that the long-stay market has experienced ample growth in terms of both supply and demand. Most stakeholders interviewed believe long-stay offers great potential for new companies since they provide a certain security of income for a certain time. The demand for them has grown strongly in Germany due to the high rental and purchase prices of housing (INV_01). Nevertheless, according to an expert and developer, the long-stay market is proven to be difficult to enter and is quite saturated by the major players within the market. While the long-stay trend is undeniable in Germany, some stakeholders mention that this market is saturated because of the biggest TPWLO’s providing this in big amounts (EXP_01; DEV_01). BLH should be aware of the risks and enter the long-stay market in a sustainable manner, which means growth should not be too fast but opportunities like this growing niche should be properly analyzed per project as noted by an industry expert, but also mentioned “I think the long-stay market is justified and there have always been a few players who have served the market well” (EXP_01, page 2). This statement indicates that this stakeholder believes that there are enough players interpret on this trend
### 4.4.2 Operational Flexibility and Conversion Opportunities
Operational Flexibility and being open to unexpected but reliable projects like conversions, can bring opportunities to stimulate growth (HCS_01). By adapting their strategy to trends as they emerge, TPWLO’s can differentiate themselves from the market and their competitors. Due to the rising construction costs and lack of land and space in favorable locations, more people are inclined toward property conversions (HCS_01; DEV_01; EXP_02). In addition, according to developers in the German market stating “So, it is easier to find an investor who is investing in a building to be converted to a hotel rather than a new to be built, a greenfield project” (DEV_01; page 2),  which shows that they believe that real estate investors are easier to find in conversions than in new builds, which offers prospects for capitalizing on this niche.
### 4.4.3 Market Differentiation
Thirdly, Strategic Positioning and Market Differentiation allows TPWLO’s to harness their USP’s and create public awareness within the market, especially in the A cities (INV_03). Niches, such as long stay, conversions and dual branding, can be adequately utilized, allowing a TPWLO to improve its positioning. A judgement with regards to dual branding is difficult to make, since the brands must be well matched and able to accommodate different guests correctly. Sharing facilities can save costs and comes with a notable trend in lean products (DEV_01) for German hotel guests. Now that the TPWLO market has established itself within the German market it is noticeable that both hotel chains and real estate investor are not able to avoid them. This leads to severe changes in negotiations, brands even see that operators are consolidating all businesses operationally to simplify their work (HCS_ 06), the growth within digitalization stimulates this tremendously (CNS_04), this is something where BLH is already putting work into because of their digital program that is able to give statements upon hotel performances (Kleinekoort et al., 2023).
## 4.5 TPWLO selection
Hotel chains and TPWLO’s have a strong connection, which makes recognizing hotel chains’ wants and needs for partnerships essential. To achieve growth for both parties, good cooperation is crucial, and this starts with choosing the right partners. But what makes a hotel brand choose a specific TPWLO? Brands are looking for reliable partners that have extensive market knowledge, trust remains key in these partnerships as hotel chains and industry experts made clear (HCS_04; HCS_05; EXP_02; EXP_03). Stakeholders agree that liquidity remains an issue that chains look at to eliminate some form of risk (CNS_03; DEV_03), should something go wrong within operations, TPWLOs are expected to take care of this and communicate well with the relevant hotel chain (HCS_03; COM_02; DEV_02).
### 4.5.1 Partnership and Relationship Management
Hotel Chains tend to be interested in the financial status of TPWLO’s, the reasoning they give is that these statements create transparency and provide a clear view of TPWLO’s financial health. As stated by a well-established international hotel chain (HCS_03; page 4), “Transparency and openness is another one. Nine times out of ten we partner with someone to obtain a project and I'm happy to partner with somebody who I know goes all the way with me.” This also implies that the connection between these two parties needs to be good.” Which was also concluded in the interview with a competitor (COM_02; page 3) “So a certain base in terms of market know-how is relevant, of course. Then what I just said before, trustworthiness and reliability, seriousness, and just a personal relationship again.” While there are some general aspects identified here, hotel chains base their choice of a TPWLO mostly on the way they approach their flexibility to leases. “They're all looking for different things, of course. One is looking for a revenue-based lease, so with a fixed lease and a variable part. Another says, no, I want everything fixed.” (EXP_02; page 6).
### 4.5.2 Strategic Location
Experts stated that hotel chains prefer projects in central locations (EXP_01; EXP_02) because these locations provide them visibility and brand awareness. “Those big chains often want to be in central locations. They don't want to be somewhere in a small town off the beaten path” (EXP_02; page 6). For TPWLOs it's also important to consider which brand they believe is best for the specific project, this results in consideration from both sides to demonstrate success.
## 4.6 The Influence of Loyalty/Exclusivity on Project Division
Hotel chains and TPWLOs form important agreements based on exclusivity and loyalty. These elements have a big influence on how hotel businesses divide up their projects in addition to shaping partnerships. However, the dynamics of these exclusive partnerships are intricate. Although exclusivity raises investor confidence and credibility, it can also prevent TPWLOs from taking advantage of expansion possibilities and strategic flexibility. These collaborations are made more difficult by the inclinations and tactical goals of hotel chains, which can have a range of effects depending on how much exclusivity is maintained. This leads to the question addressed in this subchapter: To what extent does loyalty/exclusivity between TPWLOs and chains influence the division of projects by the chain? According to a response from an investor, the loyalty and exclusivity of TPWLO and hotel chain agreements considerably enhance investors' comfort levels (INV_03). This reputation, which stems from extensive screening by major companies, is critical for investor confidence. Hotel chains frequently prefer exclusive contracts, which correspond with their strategic interests and ensure dedicated partnership, as indicated by a hotel chain that was interviewed (HCS_03). However, exclusivity might result in limits. Restricting it to one brand, as a consultant observed, may limit expansion opportunities, making it harder for TPWLOs to compete with operators who have a larger selection of agreements (CNS_04). As a result, although exclusivity secures early projects and investor confidence, combining it with strategic flexibility is critical for long-term success.
### 4.6.1 Exclusivity in Relationships
The loyalty and exclusivity in partnerships between TPWLOs and hotel chains greatly enhances the credibility and comfort of investors. As an investor confirms, "I think at the outset it helps you because you get kind of the most street credit and by you being aligned with a major brand and being selected by them for whatever a territory or a joint development agreement gives the comfort to the investor" (INV_03, Page 5). A major brand selecting TPWLO implies that it has been thoroughly vetted, which gives investors' confidence. Other hotel chains, as mentioned by a representative of a major hotel chain, prefer exclusive contracts because they align with their strategic interests, ensuring TPWLOs' commitment to collaboration and focused efforts (HCS_03). "Then he can choose which brand he wants to work with. If we go in, we would love to go in exclusively with him or someone else, so he can leave that option open, which is not in our favor" (HCS_03). However, this exclusivity can also lead to limitations. A consultant highlighted that restricting to one brand might limit growth opportunities, as TPWLOs may struggle to compete with operators who have a broader range of partnerships (CNS_04). "The thing is when you limit yourself to one brand you know then you can only grow with this one brand and all of your competition mainly has a brighter basket you know and then you can't react on that" (CNS_04, Page 9).
### 4.6.2 Partnership Dynamics
TPWLOs partnership dynamics with hotel chains are impacted by several elements, such as financial incentives, brand choices, and market competitiveness. As a competitor put it, "You just pick the brand based on the brand you think fits" (COM_01, Page 8). A hotel chain representative drew attention to how different contract terms—like rent indexation and preopening fees—affect partnerships' appeal and vary among brands: "We observe variations in indexation, or how the index influences the rent and how inflation modifies the rent over the term of the agreement" (HCS_03Q). Furthermore, as a different hotel chain noted, "I have several partners who are just very loyal. They are satisfied with how it goes, and they see no reason to change (hotel chains)" (HCS_01, Page 12). Although this dedication may lead to less flexibility, it guarantees a steady and predictable collaboration atmosphere.
### 4.6.3 Strategic Flexibility
TPWLOs must exercise strategic flexibility to survive in the cutthroat hospitality industry. TPWLOs can take advantage of various opportunities and adjust to changing market situations when they are flexible. This was illustrated through the following quote by an investor, "so it's not even to be against your main partner, but it just creates opportunity" (INV_03, Page 5). However, as a big hotel chain notes, "I think if you have a lot of companies that you're dealing with, you may get confused" (HSC_05, Page 8), this flexibility needs to be weighed with the potential complexity and confusion of handling many brand standards. As noted by a developer, having a portfolio of brands or the capacity to switch between them can give an advantage over competitors, but doing so also calls for careful management of brand standards and market positioning. "I have seen that a few white label operators used to only work with one brand. Thus, they are now expanding their portfolio and looking, for instance, to have multiple chain brands in one city because they know they can then have the potential business, even though they were only able to or willing to work, for example, with Marriott or only willing to work with Accor or very dedicated to Hilton" (DEV_02, Page 4).
## 4.7 Differentiation in Secondary Conditions
The goal is to determine the differences in secondary conditions provided to TPWLO models across different geographic regions and brand strategies. Key money and franchise agreements differ greatly, influencing financial viability, market positioning, and overall strategic planning for TPWLOs. This subchapter answers the question: What are the differences in secondary conditions offered by brands to TPWLOs, with a focus on key money structures and franchise agreements? The main answer is a nuanced one. Brands offer varied secondary conditions to TPWLOs, with differences in key money structures often tailored to project-specific needs and strategic locations, while franchise agreements typically show less flexibility. Geographic market characteristics also influence these conditions, with key locations getting preferential treatment in contract types and financial arrangements.
### 4.7.1 Contractual and Geographic Strategies
Brands use a variety of contractual tactics to align with the features of specific local markets. For example, flat lease contracts are frequent in Germany, whereas hybrid lease contracts are more typical in the Netherlands (EXP_02). This, however, according to an investor, might be changing. Hybrid leasing contracts that include participation in turnover or profit share are becoming increasingly common in Germany (INV_03). This allows owners/investors to profit more during good economic times and dampen the weight of the rent during worse economic times (for a TPWLO). Examples that can have an economic impact are COVID and high interest rates (INV_03, CNS_03, CNS_04). Furthermore, strategic location has a considerable impact on contractual decisions, as seen in Amsterdam, where financial conditions (e.g. key money) are sharpened to capitalize on the market (HCS_01). This sharpening of conditions leads to more expensive leasing contracts in A-locations.
### 4.7.2 Financial and Decision-Making Dynamics
Financial concerns and decision-making criteria differ greatly between brands. The significance of key money is highlighted for developing businesses like BLH, whose initial financial strength is modest (DEV_01). However, key money has a significant impact on contract valuation and future relationships and may lead to a worse negotiating position regarding franchise fees (HSC_04), considering the fact that key money is essentially a fee that is paid to secure the lease on a property, serving as a safeguard for the investor/owners that the bills are being paid. The allocation of key money is project-specific, with no set norm, emphasizing the importance of the geographic location (COM_02). A better geographic location leads to more key money and/or better terms on a lease agreement.
When negotiating fee structures, a TPWLO needs to choose how to fund an acquisition. When making that decision they have several options: key money, bank loan, assistance from shareholders (in the case of BLH this could be Sommerset) or using their own cash when they have enough secured cashflows.
### 4.7.3 Market Position and Strategic Use of Key Money
The allocation of key money is largely determined by market position and project desirability. For example, one of the three largest global hotel chains' strategic focuses is on franchising contracts (HCS_01). However, currently it has a limited franchising presence within the Netherlands. This indicates that there are region specific policies per chain, indicating market-specific adjustments (HCS_01).  Key money is frequently granted to projects in strategic(-ally) (essential) areas, from chains to owners (COM_02). This stresses the value of location and asset attractiveness (COM_02). Comparisons across hotel operators, such as the big three (Accor, Marriott and Hilton), demonstrate disparities in market expectations. This can be seen in their willingness to give key money and provide step-in clauses. This in turn can influence a TPWLOs decision to partner with a hotel chain (DEV_01). For chains there is a high emphasis on obtaining key sites (A locations) in cities such as The Hague and Amsterdam (HCS_01). For these key sites, chains are willing to pay more key money and hand out step-in clauses more easily (HCS_01).
## 4.8 Growth management
When growth is aspired, there are several aspects to consider. BLH is ambitious about their goals and what they want to achieve in Germany, a question that remains important in this case is; what indicators could imply that you are growing too quickly? These indicators differ in growth management human resources within operations. These include financial instability, insufficient resources, and imbalances between developing open hotels resulting in inadequate cash flows.
### 4.8.1 Effective Growth Management
Growing well in the German market is not as easy as may be interpreted at first. Like one of the biggest hotel chains in Germany mentioned, BLH should not underestimate what it takes to grow (HCS_03). The organization of TPWLOs is of great importance because challenges are inevitable. The biggest hurdle for TPWLOs identified by stakeholders is not having the resources for the expansion.  Adjusting the structure is important, as a developer mentioned “With growing your company, you also must adjust, of course, the structure of the company. And what we very often see, also by the big operators, is that they grow faster than with the number of hotels. And they don't have enough resources to do that in a proper way.” (DEV_01, page 5). Since BLH is at the crossroads of expansion they cannot afford to open several hotels at the same time (yet), due to the lack of resources. An important factor here is keeping up with open hotels to maintain a good cash flow. This means not having too many hotels in the pipeline that do not contribute to the cash flow yet. Hotel chains tend to be very keen on this. Two of the biggest hotel chains in the German market responded with “Open hotels are the one that give you money and that give you experience and credibility. If you have 12 projects and two hotels that are open, then that balance is probably going out of sync.” (HSC_05, page 13) and “Well. Keep a good balance of open hotels.” (HSC_06). Making sure that BLH has the manpower, capacity, and knowledge is key when growing (HSC_03). A lot of indicators for growing too quickly occur financially (INV_03), as a well know developer in Germany stated, “That is not having enough money… and the money runs out.” It is crucial for BLH to maintain financial stability when expanding.
### 4.8.2 Human Resource Optimization
Good human resource management tends to be of great importance, employees must be competent to take care of operations, especially in the opening phase. The pre-opening is from a developer perspective one of the hardest things in this industry, as mentioned by one the developers “What is important is that at the moment that you know you're going to have a pipeline which is coming, let's say on a regular basis, you're getting a number of new hotels, that you really are able to have a good pre-opening team because that is very often a problem, especially when you are a small company.” (DEV_01, page 5). The cause of employees not being able to take care of operations is having too many hotel rooms, which frequently makes it unmanageable for them. (CNS_03).
## 4.9 Challenges of Strategic Partnerships
Despite the obvious advantages, building and managing strategic relationships in the hotel industry poses hurdles. Operational execution, relationship management, and managing the strategic and market landscape all have a substantial impact on the success of these relationships. Without a clear awareness of these problems, BLH risks meeting unexpected roadblocks that could jeopardize its growth goals. Given these complications, it is critical to address the following question: What are the potential challenges of forming strategic alliances? Understanding these problems will enable BLH to develop effective risk mitigation and opportunity-leveraging strategies. Below we will go into the three key aspects that need to be looked at when building these alliances.
### 4.9.1 Operational Execution and Relationship Management
Strategic relationships frequently face operational obstacles (INV_03). Managing balance sheets, maintaining professional teams, and ensuring brand compliance are critical (INV_03). The first deal usually takes the longest due to early obstacles, but future deals tend to go smoothly as trust and confidence grow (HSC_06). Scaling a business while retaining close ties with owners presents another challenge, when having various properties there are multiple relationships to maintain (HSC_01). The risk involved in this matter is that these meetings with all different owners can become time-consuming. Furthermore, complex management agreements and dealing with different chains, each with its systems and standards, might make operations more difficult (HCS_01; HSC_06). Effective communication and shared investments with owners/landlords are critical for successful operations (INV_03). Investors want to be kept up to date with new developments (INV_03), this way a trusting relationship can be built.
### 4.9.2 Partnerships and Alliances
Forming and managing partnerships and alliances have their own set of challenges. For chains, there is a possibility that partners (i.e. TPWLOs) will create their own brands, leading to direct competition (HCS_01). Working with multiple chains can provide flexibility, but it also adds complexity because of differences in standards and operational processes (DEV_02; HSC_06). Choosing the proper strategic partners is critical since they can considerably increase potential (COM_02), having strategic partners can contribute to BLH´s visibility within the German market and help to build up a good track record. Building loyalty and trust via regular assistance and different initiatives is essential for successful collaborations. An observation gained through most interviews is that the hotel industry is a small market, almost everyone knows each other in some way. This indicates that when loyalty and trust is gained, it can be beneficial for BLH´s negotiation position.
### 4.9.3 Strategic and Market Challenges
The market climate presents major hurdles to strategic collaborations. There is fierce rivalry for restricted hotel projects, and the current project volume is small (in Germany) (COM_02). Finding investors prepared to commit to specific hotel projects is becoming more challenging (EXP_02). Gaining financial and perception credibility rapidly is critical for market entry (HCS_03). Furthermore, overcommitting in lease agreements without understanding the market can result in financial difficulties (CNS_04). To mitigate these dangers, adequate guarantees and a thorough understanding of market needs are essential (DEV_04; CNS_04).
## 4.10 Cultural Integration
Expansion into Germany poses major cultural integration issues for TPWLOs. Industry experts, competitors, hotel chains, and consultants have recognized these issues as critical elements influencing market entry success. The formal and efficiency-focused communication style in the German hospitality sector necessitates TPWLOs developing trust by regular actions, accurate communication, and strict adherence to timetables. Furthermore, identifying and nurturing local talent capable of bridging cultural gaps is tough. A successful entry also requires strategic planning that is consistent with local regulations and market conditions, highlighting the necessity of developing strategic ties with local businesses. What are the risks of cultural integration when expanding into Germany? The rest of this subchapter explores five critical themes from the interviews, addressing different aspects of cultural integration risks and methods for successful market entry into Germany. These themes encapsulate BLH's main areas of interest and concern.
### 4.10.1 Business Communication and Relationship Building
The first theme, Business Communication and, Relationship Building, emphasizes how crucial it is to understand and adjust to Germany's formal communication style. A diplomatic approach to communication is highly valued over direct methods, which helps in building trust and avoiding misunderstandings. This style is not only about being polite but also about being strategic in interactions to ensure that relationships are built on a solid foundation of mutual respect and understanding. The requirement for precise and unambiguous communication was highlighted by one prominent consultant from a big consultancy firm who stated that "they would at least be able to give directions (...) I think language is key there" (CNS_03, Page 12). Naturally, you shouldn't be that straightforward in communicating, according to the advice of another interviewee; you should adopt a more diplomatic stance in your dealings (CNS_03, Page 8). Regarding relationship building, as another consultant said, "building trust takes time, and you need to show consistency in your actions" (CNS_04, Page 15) and that "building trust is a gradual process that requires consistent and reliable actions."
### 4.10.2 Cultural Competence and Adaptation
The second subject, Cultural Competence and Adaptation emphasizes the need for cultural sensitivity as well as the ability to change business practices to adhere to the formal, efficiency-driven ideology of German hospitality culture. Success in this market is heavily dependent on adapting to these cultural norms to develop strong partnerships. A professional in the field said, "I would say that the German hospitality culture is more formal and focused on efficiency" (EXP_02, page 1). This methodical and effective strategy necessitates adaptability and flexibility from firms. The expectation for formal interaction is not just a preference but a critical component of everyday business operations, reflecting the country's broader cultural emphasis on order and precision. "I think if you have the sensitivity to be able to adapt to the German style of doing business, you'll do fine," said a hotel chain representative (HCS_03, Pages 8-9). Success in the German market also requires flexibility and the willingness to adjust strategies to meet local demands. The market is dynamic, and being too stiff can be a disadvantage. Another interviewee emphasized the significance of adaptability, saying, "Adaptability is essential. You must be prepared to modify your plans in response to local demands" (CNS_03, Page 3). Companies that can pivot and adapt to changing circumstances or customer needs are more likely to succeed.
### 4.10.3 Operational Excellence
Next, the requirement for high levels of Operational Excellence in Germany is the third theme. "German operations expect a high level of precision and adherence to schedules," said an industry expert with more than 20 years of experience (EXP_03, Page 2). There is a high expectation for operational precision and adherence to schedules. Careful planning and execution are required to meet the German standards of business operations. This extends beyond simple efficiency and into every aspect of business operations, from project planning to daily management and customer service. This is a high requirement that requires careful preparation and implementation. "If we sign a deal, great," said another consultant. "If we don't sign it yet, we keep working towards it," demonstrating the dedication needed to live up to these high standards (CNS_03, Page 8).
### 4.10.4 Organizational Human Resources Management
The fourth theme, Organizational Human Resources Management, addresses the challenge of finding and training the right talent who can bridge the company's culture with local market expectations. Finding and training the right talent who understands both the local market and the company's culture is a significant challenge. Local talent not only brings knowledge of the local business environment but also carries cultural insights that can bridge any gaps that might exist between a foreign company and local business practices. As one HR manager pointed out, "Finding the right talent who understands both the local market and your company's culture is a challenge" (HCS_01, Page 5). This challenge is compounded by the need to train staff to meet the high standards expected in Germany, as another HR manager noted (HCS_02).
### 4.10.5 Strategic Market Entry and Expansion
The fifth and final theme, Strategic Market Entry and Expansion, emphasizes the need for a well-defined strategic plan that considers local regulations and market conditions (INV_01). Forming partnerships with local firms can help market entry and help navigate local business regulations and practices. These partnerships can provide valuable local insights, ease logistical challenges (when relevant), and enhance credibility in a new market. Additionally, forming strategic partnerships with local firms can significantly ease the entry process and help navigate the local business landscape, as another strategic investor stated, "Partnerships with local firms can ease the entry process and help navigate the local business landscape" (INV_02, Page 8).
# 5. Recommendations for BLH to Enter the German Market
After bringing together our research findings and providing answers to the research questions, we now shift our focus to the broader management question raised in Chapter 1. Chapter 5 will address the overarching management question and incorporate our findings into recommendations. This chapter will also make recommendations for future studies and provide actionable insights for BLH, ensuring that our findings are not just academically sound but also useful.
The management question arising from prior research, defining on how BLH can optimize its strategy for entering the German market to strengthen its white-label positioning, has been demonstrated to consist of three components: Growth Pathways, Partnership Selection, and Risk Assessment. All components relied primarily on interviews to come to the advice.
## 5.1 Growth Pathways
This section focuses on the form and manner of growth when addressing the management question. We found that TPWLOs are in essence a commodity (the same), sharing basic business models, the differences between them are based are three things: market focus, brand alignment and local flexibility (EXP_01, EXP_02, EXP_04, DEV_04, HCS_04, INV_01, INV_02, INV_03, CNS_03, CNS_05).
The ability to adapt and strategical positioning contribute to the company's effectiveness within the German market. BLH want to expand into Germany with no clear indications of where and how the growth will take place, our data shows that their scope is too big, and they should narrow down their focus to 3, 4, or 5 provinces of Germany. To illustrate, North-Rhine Westfalen, a province in West-Germany, has more citizens than The Netherlands as a whole and when looking at landmass it is in fact smaller. Advice derived from primary research is filtering down and focusing on minor quantities of regions. Local knowledge is of great importance in projects, and it has been shown that due to the size of Germany and the diversities between provinces it is difficult to maintain an overview to grow properly and steadily. Focusing on specific regions can help BLH maintain a good reputation and create financial stability, thereby gaining trust. Another component within growth is hiring local talent, increasing success rate, this will be further explained in the section Risk Assessment.
Starting in A/B or B/C locations is still a point of discussion among stakeholders, with A/B locations being preferable for brand awareness (DEV_02, INV_01). And B/C cities are more economical in some cases, due to less popularity in these places, construction, refurbishment and conversion costs are significantly lower (HCS_03, DEV_03). Carefully managing leverage is essential, using funds to increase growth and maximize following profits. When using debt to finance your assets, BLH can attract more capital and expand their investment opportunities (DEV_01). Finding a balance between risk and return is of great importance since too much debt can influence BLH’s financial stability negatively. Given the congestion and high prices in A/B cities, BLH should prioritize conversions here, while still being open to new buildings in B/C cities for a more economical approach. Hotel chains also consider the strategic positioning of projects. Chains usually prefer projects with higher visibility and brand awareness in central locations. Aligning the project’s location with the hotel's marketing strategy is vital for mutual success.
Conversions and flexibility in accepting various projects are crucial for growth. It became clear that conversion projects, when opportunity presents itself, are a good foundation for growth. There are severe restrictions on building hotels from scratch, in addition, construction costs are extremely high, especially in the A/B cities due to high demand and complicated supply chains (HCS_01, DEV_01). Since German A/B cities are already quite congested and the good locations in these are tenanted, BLH can still grow using conversions (DEV_01, HCS_01, COM_01, COM_02). It has been found that besides old and/or inoperable hotels, many old office buildings are also often converted into new hotels, this approach also remains more appealing to investors (DEV_01).
With regards to other niches when looking to optimize growth opportunities, the long-stay market has been identified as a growing niche (INV_01, COM_02). Although some stakeholders believe this market is justified (EXP_01, DEV_01), renting an apartment or house is not as economical as it used to be considering the locations and facilities hotels have to offer. From most interviews, it became clear that dual branding is not advisable for BLH, unless in niche and or rare cases with long-stay in A, and (sometimes) B locations.
## 5.2 Partnership Selection
Hotel brands select a specific third-party white label operator (TPWLO) based on several crucial considerations. Trust is paramount in these relationships; therefore, hotel chains look for trustworthy, reliable partners with deep industry understanding (HCS_04; HCS_05; EXP_02; EXP_03). Establishing transparency and openness is essential to create a strong foundation for trust with potential hotel chain partners. It is advised that TPWLOs provide regular updates on project progress and financial health to help maintain trust and demonstrate reliability (HCS_03; COM_02). Additionally, demonstrating a comprehensive knowledge of the hospitality market enhances the appeal to hotel chains seeking knowledgeable partners (HCS_03; COM_02).
Financial health and transparency are critical factors in the selection process. Hotel chains prefer TPWLOs with solid financial standing to mitigate operational risks (CNS_03; DEV_03). TPWLOs should maintain financial transparency by providing detailed and transparent financial statements to reassure potential partners of their reliability (HCS_03; COM_02; DEV_02). Highlighting financial stability and the ability to manage risks further ensures hotel chains of TPWLO’s capability to handle operational challenges (HCS_03; COM_02; DEV_02). It is recommended to conduct regular financial audits and share results (e.g. quarterly financials) to further prove financial health and present risk management plans and KPI’s. (e.g. employee turnover rate).
The loyalty and exclusivity between TPWLOs and hotel chains significantly influence how projects are distributed. Exclusive affiliations enhance market visibility and reliability, as investors gain more confidence (INV_03) in a TPWLO affiliated in some sort of exclusivity with a major hotel chain. Such arrangements demonstrate that brands have thoroughly researched and identified the best investors, providing comfort to stakeholders (INV_03). TPWLOs often prefer exclusive contracts because they ensure that the TPWLO will exert considerable effort in the partnership. However, exclusivity can limit growth potential by restricting the number of brands TPWLO can work with (HCS_03).
Balancing exclusivity with flexibility is crucial. While exclusivity can help capture initial orders and investors’ trust, finding appropriate levels of flexibility for future engagements is equally important. This flexibility allows TPWLOs to engage in various opportunities and respond to market dynamics, although it may complicate the management of multiple brand standards (CNS_04). Therefore, loyalty and exclusivity should be employed in a way that maximizes growth and maintains a competitive edge. It is advisable to use exclusivity strategically to secure high-value partnerships without overcommitting, and to craft agreements that allow for periodic review and adjustment to meet evolving market conditions (CNS_04; HCS_03). Therefore, BLH should selectively exclusive. The final recommendation consists of three steps. The first step is selecting the hotel chains BLH wants to be exclusive with to get earlier access to projects and establish investor confidence. The second step is to ensure that contracts allow for periodic review and revision to reflect changing market conditions. The final recommendation is to maintain a diverse set of relationships (with all other holders except for hotel chains) to remain agile and competitive.
Hotel brands also consider the strategic positioning of projects. Chains usually prefer projects with higher visibility and brand awareness in central locations (EXP_01; EXP_02, Page 6). Aligning the project’s location with the hotel's marketing strategy is vital for mutual success. Providing tailored financial solutions that address the specific needs and goals of each hotel chain partner can further enhance the partnership. Additionally, conducting competitive analysis to understand and meet the unique requirements of different hotel brands is crucial (COM_01).
The secondary conditions provided by brands to TPWLOs vary significantly, especially regarding key money structures and franchise agreements, which are essential in determining financial prospects and strategic positioning (EXP_02; INV_03). Contractual strategies vary by geographic location and brand strategy. For example, flat lease contracts are common in Germany, while hybrid lease contracts are more popular in the Netherlands (EXP_02). Mixed leasing contracts, which include turnover or profit-related components, are increasingly used in Germany to manage environmental risks such as COVID-19 and high-interest rates (INV_03; CNS_03; CNS_04).
Financial considerations and decision-making processes differ across brands. Key money is critical in business development, reflecting the contract value and future partnership potential (DEV_01). Funding is typically allocated according to project requirements, indicating strategic financial planning (HCS_04). However, key money can be a costly form of growth financing. Hotel operators should carefully consider whether a bank loan might be more advantageous than key money, as key money will lead to increased franchise fees (HCS_04). Franchise agreements represent a long-term investment and result in high ongoing fees.
## 5.3 Risk Assessment
When looking at the management question through this component the focus lays on the risks of expanding to Germany. When aiming for growth and expansion risks are obviously involved these must be considered and evaluated carefully. There are various indicators that signify ‘unhealthy’ growth, such as not having enough resources for the expansion, not having enough knowledgeable employees in the right place (INV_01, HCS_03). Interviewees emphasized the need to manage the resources and adjusting structures. The German market is culturally very different than The Netherlands, therefore BLH should outsource HR to local parties with the knowledge of the local market. Here you can avoid hiring the wrong people, that are potentially unqualified due to lack of cultural adaptations. Furthermore, it is important to maintain a balance between the open and pipelined hotels, to ensure proper cashflow (HCS_06). Here it is also important to mention that open hotels are not directly stable, attention should be given to the FSY (first stable year) which is in (most cases) 4 years after opening. This must be done through creating and monitoring KPIs that indicate cashflow and cash burn.
When reaping the rewards of strategic alliances also challenges are involved. They can be difficult to form if there is no knowledge about the financial and/or credibility perceptions of the relevant stakeholders. To minimize risks, market knowledge is highly requisite, making outsourcing of local talent highly advisable.
When expanding into Germany some major cultural integration issues for TPWLOs arise. The importance of speaking the German language, understanding the local culture and the necessity of strategic planning is emphasized (EXP_01, EXP_02, COM_01, COM_02, DEV_01, DEV_02, INV_03). Therefore, referring to the world of outsourcing, BLH should hire local talent, ensuring local knowledge and expertise within discerning projects. These local talents can also help maintain and build the relationship with the German stakeholders.
## 5.4 Recommendations BLH
In the following subchapter, the link will be made from the three parted answers to the management question to concrete advice for BLH themselves. Our advice boils down to ten points.
First, BLH should acknowledge that, while TPWLOs in the German market share fundamental business concepts, operational effectiveness and strategic differentiation are critical to success. Currently, the market is saturated, therefore BLH should concentrate on conversion projects. In order to stand out, the company must use its strengths in adaptability and strategic positioning.
Next, BLH should concentrate its efforts on 3-5 key provinces, such as North-Rhine Westfalen, which has a significant population and economic activity similar to an entire country like the Netherlands. This more tailored approach will enable BLH to successfully manage resources and establish a strong reputation in these regions.
Moving on to the hiring of employees, outsourcing HR and finance to local professionals will reduce errors and promote cultural integration. By using local knowledge and expertise, this method will reduce the hiring of unqualified individuals while increasing operational efficiency.
Fourth, BLH should prioritize conversion projects above new development. Converting existing office buildings and dysfunctional hotels into new hotels is a cost-effective growth strategy that appeals to investors. This technique is consistent with the high demand and limited availability of excellent locations in Germany.
Building upon this, choosing between A/B and B/C cities requires a deliberate strategy. A/B locations increase brand visibility, however, B/C cities are more cost-effective due to cheaper construction and refurbishment costs. Given the congestion and high prices in A/B cities, BLH should prioritize conversions here. While still being open to new builds in B/C cities for a more economical approach.
Sixth, the long-stay market is a growing sector that BLH should pursue. Although some stakeholders are dubious, the benefits of long-stay hotels in terms of location and amenities make them a potential growth opportunity. Dual branding should be limited to specialized circumstances, this being when long-stay is involved in an A and (sometimes) B location.
Furthermore, BLH should prioritize developing solid, trustworthy connections with hotel chains. Financial stability and transparency are crucial considerations. Regular updates on project development and financial health will help to build confidence and reliability. Balancing exclusivity and flexibility in collaborations will allow BLH to acquire high-value contracts without overcommitting to one single chain.
When looking at finance, effective resource management and the adjustment of internal structures are critical. BLH should maintain financial stability by regularly monitoring KPIs for cash flow and cash burn. Maintaining a balance of open and pipelined hotels ensures consistent cash flow and operational stability.
To tackle cultural integration issues, BLH should focus on hiring local talent and learning about local company culture. Local workers will assist with navigating cultural differences and developing strong relationships with German stakeholders.
Lastly, key money should be strategically used to secure desirable projects and locations. BLH must carefully consider whether key money or regular financing options, such as bank loans, are more profitable for each project, as obtaining key money may worsen franchise fee negotiations. This approach will result in effective financial planning and growth.
By focusing on these key areas, BLH can optimize its strategy for entering the German market, ensuring a strong white-label positioning.
