---
title: "PAPERS 1 4"
date: 2023-12-08
type: journal
area: finance
tags: [type/journal, area/finance, status/active, topic/finance-theory]
status: active
source_file: "PERSONAL/SCHOOL/HMSM/PremasterPart2/Elective Finance/Final sources/WordFiles/PAPERS 1-4.docx"
source_type: docx
confidence: 0.8
imported: 2026-05-14
---

PAPER 1: Fisher, J. G., Maines, L. A., Peffer, S. A., & Sprinkle, G. B. (2002). Using budgets for performance evaluation: effects of resource allocation and horizontal information asymmetry on budget proposals, budget slack, and performance. The Accounting Review, 77(4), 847–865. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr.2002.77.4.847

Using Budgets for Performance Evaluation: Effects of Resource Allocation and Horizontal Information Asymmetry on Budget Proposals, Budget Slack, and Performance Joseph G. Fisher Laureen A. Maines Indiana University Sean A. Peffer University of Kentucky Geoffrey B. Sprinkle Indiana University ABSTRACT: Business executives and academics frequently criticize budgetbased compensation plans as providing incentives for subordinates to build slack into proposed budgets. In this paper, we examine whether either of two practices-using budgets to allocate scarce resources, or providing information about co-workers-reduces budget slack and increases subordinate performance when organizations use budgets for performancevaluation. The results from our experiment show that using budgets for both resource allocation and performancevaluation not only eliminates budget slack, but also This paper has benefited greatly from the detailed suggestions of Marlys Lipe. We also thank Anil Arya, Chee Chow, Srikant Datar, Harry Evans, John Fellingham, Eric Hirst, Pat Hopkins, Steve Kachelmeier, Bill Kinney, Theresa Libby, Joan Luft, Roger Martin, Ken Merchant, Jamie Pratt, Jerry Salamon, Mike Shields, Jerry Stem, Nathan Stuart, Kristy Towry, Rick Tubbs, David Upton, Jim Wahlen, Michael Williamson, two anonymous reviewers, and participants at the American Accounting Association 2001 Annual Meeting, Arizona State University, Indiana University, The University of Iowa, London School of Economics and Political Science, Maastricht University, University of Minnesota, New England Behavioral Accounting Research Series, The Ohio State University, and The University of Texas at Austin Accounting Research Workshops for their very helpful comments and suggestions. The University of Kentucky and the Pressler Faculty Fellowship at Indiana University provided generous funding for this project. Submitted May 2001 Accepted March 2002 847 848 The Accounting Review, October 2002 increases subordinates' effort and task performance. Additionally, we find that an internal reporting system that provides information about subordinates' budgets and performance to their co-workers mitigates budget slack when superiors do not use budgets as a basis for resource allocation. These results highlight the synergies between the planning (resource allocation) and control (performance evaluation) functions of managerial accounting practices such as budgeting. Our results also suggest that by designing the internal information system to reduce information asymmetry among subordinates, the firm can increase subordinates' incentives to provide more accurate budgets. Keywords: budgeting; performance evaluation; resource allocation; information; slack; performance. Data Availability: Data gathered in this study are available from the authors upon request. I. INTRODUCTION T Traditional budget-based compensation plans provide economic incentives for subordinate managers to misrepresent (understate) their productivity and build slack into budgets (Horngren et al. 2000, 185; Jensen 2001). Slack creates a bias in budgets and can reduce firm profits due to costly planning errors and greater compensation or perquisite consumption for subordinate managers. To mitigate budget slack, researchers developed "truth-inducing" schemes incorporate budget-related parameters and recognize the opposing incentives created by using budgets for resource allocation and performance evaluation. Our investigation of the dual use of budgets for resource allocation and performance evaluation differs from prior empirical research in two important ways. First, we focus on the efficacy of budget-based schemes commonly observed in practice rather than on the more complex, and rarely used, truth-inducing schemes derived by analytic research. Second, prior studies exogenously endow participants with a productivity level (which mechanistically maps into performance), thereby focusing primarily on misrepresentations of that productivity. In contrast, we examine a setting in which participants' performance depends on both their endogenous ability and effort. This allows us to examine whether using budgets for both performance evaluation and resource allocation affects subordinates' effort and concomitant performance. 852 The Accounting Review, October 2002 are fixed exogenously. The compensation scheme in Equation (2) leads the superior to prefer higher budget levels, so higher budget proposals by the subordinate should result in higher final budget levels, and thus in lower budget slack.3 HUa: Subordinates will submit higher initial budget proposals when the superior allocates productive resources to subordinates than when the superior does not allocate productive resources to subordinates. Hlb: Slack in the final budget will be lower when the superior allocates productive resources to subordinates than when the superior does not allocate productive resources to subordinates. Prior research provides little guidance as to whether the lower budget slack (i.e., higher budget levels) proposed in Hlb will increase subordinate performance. Studies employing individual subordinate settings have not found that truth-inducing (Weitzman 1976) contracts lead to consistent differences in performance relative to traditional budget-based contracts, even though truth-inducing schemes result in higher budget levels (Chow et al. 1988, 1991). Additionally, multi-subordinate resource allocation studies have not allowed subordinates' ability and effort to endogenously determine their productivity. We expect that subordinates will perform at a higher level when superiors allocate resources and when subordinates' performance is a function of their ability and effort. A superior can allocate more resources to the subordinate whose budget or past performance signals greater productivity (i.e., greater ability or effort). Additionally, subordinates likely will be motivated to increase their effort and produce more output to exceed the higher budget levels that exist when superiors allocate resources (as predicted by the lower budget slack in Hlb). This motivation arises from subordinates' desire to increase both their current compensation and future resource allocations, which are likely to depend on past performance. Hic: Subordinate performance will be higher when the superior allocates productive resources among subordinates than when the superior does not allocate productive resources among subordinates. Notwithstanding our predictions in Hla-Hlc, there are several reasons why resource allocation may not increase subordinate budget proposals, reduce budget slack, and increase subordinate performance. For example, psychological factors such as equity concerns (e.g., Luft 1997; Luft and Libby 1997; Kachelmeier and Towry 2002) might diminish the effectiveness of resource allocation in mitigating slack and improving performance. If superiors allocate resources based on differential productivity, then subordinates allocated fewer resources may feel unfairly treated and reciprocate with lower budget proposals and performance. Analogously, if superiors under-reward (as perceived by subordinates) higher productivity, then higher-performing subordinates may feel unfairly treated and reduce their budget proposals and effort. Moreover, even if subordinates perceive the distribution of resources to be fair, they may view their (predicted) higher budgets under resource allocation to be unfair, as suggested by prior research that has hypothesized a negative relation between budget levels and performance (Chow et al. 1988, 116). We could present and test a hypothesis similar to Hlb for final budget levels. Given the high relation between budget levels and budget slack (a correlation of -0.94, p < 0.01 in our experiment), we examine and report results only for budget slack. Fisher, Maines, Peffer, and Sprinkle-Using Budgets for Performance Evaluation 853 Our multiple-subordinate setting also provides the superior with natural benchmarks for comparing budget levels and performance, potentially reducing the information asymmetry among subordinates and superiors regarding subordinates' production capabilities. Furthermore, our multiple-subordinate setting may foster social pressure and competition among subordinates, increasing subordinates' desires to outbid and outperform their coworkers (Young et al. 1993). Both types of benchmarking can reduce slack in subordinates' budgets and improve subsequent performance, even if superiors do not use the budget as a basis for allocating resources (Locke and Latham 1990, 119, 136-138; Hansen and Mowen 2003, 559). We explore the effects of such information in the next section. Mitigating Effects of Information The presence of multiple subordinates raises the issue of whether a superior should use the firm's information system to provide subordinates with information about their coworkers' budgets and performance. Under such relative performance evaluation (e.g., benchmarking), subordinates receive information regarding the activities and performance of comparable referents.4 We refer to this as the "low horizontal information asymmetry" condition. Alternatively, the superior may choose to keep this information private ("high horizontal information asymmetry" condition). We expect that low horizontal information asymmetry will lead subordinates to increase their budget proposals and decrease their budget slack due to a combination of economic and psychological factors related to competition among subordinates. From an economic perspective, if the superior uses higher budget proposals as a basis (benchmark) for setting all subordinates' budgets, then providing co-workers' budget and performance information to subordinates emphasizes that the economic benefits of submitting low budget proposals are likely to be low. Moreover, superiors may sanction subordinates who submit significantly lower budgets than their co-workers by substantially increasing these subordinates' final budget levels.5 From a psychological/sociological perspective, subordinates likely feel social pressure not to appear as if they have less ability or motivation than their co-workers (see also Young 1985). Furthermore, regardless of social pressure, some subordinates probably desire to outperform their co-workers, in terms of both their budget proposals and their actual performance. In this regard, information about co-workers gives subordinates explicit benchmarks by which to gauge their own budget and performance, thereby serving as a catalyst for social competition (Locke and Latham 1990, 136-137). We further propose that the effect of providing subordinates with information about their co-workers will depend on whether the superior allocates resources among subordinates. Hypothesis 1 proposes that resource allocation provides subordinates with a strong economic incentive to propose budgets near their capabilities, which leaves little room for 4 Superiors also provide such information to subordinates to communicate and coordinate organizational activities (Horngren et al. 2000, 180). For example, Hilton et al. (2000, 625) note that, to facilitate coordination, "each manager throughout the organization must be aware of the plans made by other managers." We examine whether this common practice affects subordinates' motivation to misrepresent their private information and increase their task performance. The interaction among subordinates and superiors can be viewed as a strategic game. Thus, information about one subordinate's strategy (e.g., actual budget proposals, budget levels, and performance) can change another subordinate's strategy. For example, assume the superior attributes "large" differences between subordinates' budget proposals to self-interest (and ratchets up the lower bidding subordinate's final budget), but attributes "small" differences between subordinates' budget proposals to variations in skill level (and does not ratchet up the lower bidding subordinate's final budget). Given this retaliation (or "tit-for-tat") strategy by the superior, knowledge of coworkers' budget bids can affect subordinates' bidding strategies and concomitant budget levels. 854 The Accounting Review, October 2002 information about co-workers to affect budget proposals and budget levels. In contrast, when resources are fixed, subordinates have incentives to submit budgets with more slack, and information about co-workers is thus more likely to affect budget proposals and budget levels. Consequently, we posit that information on co-workers' budgets and performance will prompt subordinates to set more challenging budgets for themselves which, in turn, will lead to higher final budget levels containing less slack, but only when the superior does not allocate resources among subordinates. H2a: Knowledge of other subordinates' budget proposals, counteroffers, budget levels, and performance will increase subordinates' initial budget proposals when resource allocations are fixed, but not when the superior allocates productive resources among subordinates. H2b: Knowledge of other subordinates' budget proposals, counteroffers, budget levels, and performance will reduce the slack in the final budget when resource allocations are fixed, but not when the superior allocates productive resources among subordinates. There are several reasons to expect that low information asymmetry will also increase subordinates' performance. First, if H2b is supported, then subordinates must produce more to receive compensation above their salary (base pay). Second, information about coworkers gives subordinates external performance goals that may increase their motivation (Locke et al. 1981; Locke and Latham 1990). Finally, to the extent that subordinates' budget proposals simply represent "cheap talk," social competition may manifest primarily in performance, which more directly reflects subordinate's ability and motivation. As with H2a and H2b, we predict in H2c that information about peer subordinates will affect subordinates' performance only when the superior does not allocate productive resources among subordinates. H2c: Knowledge of other subordinates' budget proposals, counteroffers, budget levels, and performance will increase subordinates' own performance when resource allocations are fixed, but not when the superior allocates productive resources among subordinates. Notwithstanding our predictions in H2a-H2c, there are several reasons why providing subordinates with information about their co-workers' budgets and performance may not increase subordinate budget proposals, reduce budget slack, and increase subordinate performance when resources are fixed. For example, superiors' use of higher-productivity subordinates as a benchmark for lower-productivity subordinates is more transparent when horizontal information asymmetry is low. Subordinates may perceive inequity in such explicit benchmarking and respond with lower budget proposals and performance. Knowledge of co-workers' actions (strategies) may also help subordinates implicitly collude to keep budget proposals low and budget slack high. V. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION In this paper, we investigate whether two managerial practices-using budgets to allocate scarce resources, and providing information about subordinates to their coworkers-mitigates the dysfunctional effects on subordinates' behavior of using budgets for performance evaluation. We examine how these two practices affect two facets of subordinates' behavior: (1) their motivation to misrepresent their private information to create budget slack, and (2) their motivation to increase their effort and task performance after budgets are determined. The results from our laboratory experiment are consistent with our hypotheses that using budgets both as a basis for allocating scarce productive resources among subordinates and as a basis for evaluating subordinates significantly increases subordinates' initial budget proposals, decreases slack in the final budget, and increases subordinate performance. Specifically, when superiors used budgets to allocate scarce resources, subordinates had no slack in their budgets, and their task performance increased by 25 percent. Additionally, we found that subordinates' task-performance increase was due to their heightened motivation to acquire scarce resources and exceed budget targets, rather than to the manner in which superiors allocated resources among subordinates. We also find that the degree of information asymmetry among subordinates affects budget outcomes, but only when superiors do not use budgets to allocate resources. When the superior could not use budgets to allocate scarce resources, subordinates who knew the budget proposals, counteroffers, and performance of the other subordinate made higher initial budget proposals and had final budgets containing less slack than subordinates who did not have this information. When the superior could use budgets to allocate scarce resources, the degree of information asymmetry did not significantly affect subordinates' initial budget proposals or the slack in the final budget. Finally, the degree of information asymmetry between subordinates did not significantly affect subordinates' performance. The results of our study demonstrate the interdependent effects of the planning and control roles of managerial accounting practices such as budgeting. Our research suggests that firms can mitigate problems arising when superiors use budgets only for performance evaluation or only as a basis for resource allocation by using the same budget for both purposes. Thus, our results provide insight into why firms frequently use a single budget for both planning and control purposes and employ traditional budget-based, rather than "truth-inducing," compensation schemes. Our results also suggest that ex post inefficiencies such as the existence of slack and capital rationing (i.e., the use of a hurdle rate in excess of the firm's cost of capital) described in analytic research (e.g., Antle and Eppen 1985; Antle and Fellingham 1997) may not be necessary when budgets provide a basis for both resource allocation and performance evaluation. More generally, our study highlights the advantages of simultaneously studying the multiple roles of managerial accounting tools, such as budgets, to evaluate their effectiveness (also see Sprinkle 2002). In contrast to research that focuses on conflicts between the dual roles of budgets (Epstein and Manzoni 2001), our study suggests that the tension between these two roles Fisher, Maines, Peffer, and Sprinkle-Using Budgets for Performance Evaluation 863 can be beneficial. Accordingly, our study supplements research demonstrating the effort and performance-enhancing effects of budget-based contracts relative to other contracts (see, e.g., Bonner et al. 2000), by suggesting that firms can further increase employee productivity with budget-based contracts by linking resources to budget proposals or prior budget attainment. Alternatively, if the firm does not use the budget as a basis for allocating resources, then our results suggest that the design of a firm's internal information system can play an important role in mitigating subordinates' incentives to misrepresent their private information when their superiors use the budget only as a basis for performance evaluation. Here, we document that, similar to the effect of reducing vertical information asymmetry between subordinates and superiors (Young 1985; Fisher et al. 2002), reducing the degree of horizontal information asymmetry among subordinates reduces budget slack. Some limitations of our study provide opportunities for future research. For example, we propose that the level of information asymmetry affects both economic and psychological/sociological factors, but we do not explore the relative influences of these factors. Future research could investigate more thoroughly the mechanisms governing our information asymmetry results by measuring subordinates' reputation concerns and perceptions of social pressure, and/or by manipulating whether such information affects the economic incentives associated with the strategic game among subordinates and superiors. Investigating these mechanisms and motivations may help explain why horizontal information asymmetry affects subordinate behavior and, in turn, when it is most likely to do so. Future research also might examine the robustness of our results to individual, task, and environmental variables (e.g., risk preferences, uncertainty, type of feedback), which we did not manipulate or measure but which can affect budget outcomes (see Luft and Shields 2002).


PAPER 2: Parker, R. J., & Kyj, L. S. (2006). Vertical information sharing in the budgeting process. Accounting Organizations and Society, 31(1), 27–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2004.07.005

Vertical information sharing in the budgeting process Robert J. Parker a,*, Larissa Kyj b a Department of Accounting, College of Business Administration, University of New Orleans, Lakefront, New Orleans, LA 70148, USA b Rowan University, 201 Mullica Hill Road, Glassboro, NJ 08028-9932, USA Abstract This study develops a model of vertical information sharing between superior and subordinate in the budgeting process. Upward information sharing involves the revelation of private information by subordinate to superior. Its proposed antecedents are budget participation and organizational commitment while job performance is a proposed outcome. Downward information exchanges from superior to subordinate are also examined by including role ambiguity in the model. Survey results suggest that vertical information sharing is an important intervening variable in understanding the performance effects of budget participation and organizational commitment.  2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. One of the most important benefits of the budgeting process is the sharing of information between organizational members (e.g., Hopwood, 1976). Information exchanges between subordinate and superior during budget discussions are especially important with many possible benefits both for the individual and organization (Shields & Shields, 1998). Vertical information sharing involves both upward communication of information from subordinate to superior and downward communication from superior to subordinate. Regarding upward communication, a common assumption in the accounting literature, especially in agency studies, is that subordinates often know more about their operational areas than do their superiors, i.e., subordinates have so-called private information (e.g., Chow, Cooper, & Waller, 1988; Christensen, 1982; Merchant, 1981; Nouri & Parker, 1998; Waller, 1988; Young, 1985). Budget participation may enable subordinates to communicate their private information to their superiors resulting in better budgets and decision-making (e.g., Magner, Welker, & Campbell, 1996; Nouri & Parker, 1998; Shields & Shields, 1998). While many studies assume that participation increases the revelation of information, they do not directly assess it. Miller and Monge (1986) point this out in their meta-analysis of participatory decisionmaking in the management, applied psychology, and organizational behavior literatures. Cognitive 0361-3682/$ - see front matter  2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.aos.2004.07.005 * Corresponding author. E-mail address: rjampark@aol.com (R.J. Parker). www.elsevier.com/locate/aos Accounting, Organizations and Society 31 (2006) 27–45 i An update to this article is included at the end models in these literatures assume that participation leads to disclosure of private information by the subordinate; however, as Miller and Monge (1986) argue, prior studies do not allow for a complete test of their models because the studies ‘‘lacked data on several intervening variables,... such as upward and downward sharing of information’’ (p. 746). Miller and Monge (1986) ‘‘encourage researchers to measure these [intervening] variables in future investigations of participation’’ (p. 746). No studies have directly examined the relation between participation and information sharing to the knowledge of the current authors. This study attempts to do so, within an accounting context, by exploring the links between budget participation and information exchanges in the budgeting process. While budget participation may facilitate information sharing, another important consideration is the motivation of subordinates to reveal information (Hopwood, 1976). Motivation to share information may depend, in part, upon a previously overlooked factor, the organizational commitment of the subordinate. Those who are highly committed to the organization want the organization to succeed; consequently, they are more likely to reveal their private information which can be used to enhance the performance of both the subordinate and the organization. In the proposed theoretical framework, budget participation and organization commitment increase upward communication of information which, in turn, increases the job performance of the subordinate. Information sharing may increase individual performance in a number of ways including: (1) enabling the superior to help develop better strategies for the subordinate (Murray, 1990); (2) ensuring that the subordinate receives adequate budgetary support (Nouri & Parker, 1998). To properly assess the proposed links involving upward communication, and to create a more comprehensive model of vertical information sharing, downward communication is also examined. Several studies suggest that, through the budgeting process, subordinates gain additional information from superiors and others that increases the subordinates effectiveness (e.g., Chenhall & Brownell, 1988; Kren, 1992; Magner et al., 1996). As Chenhall and Brownell (1988) argue, discussions with superiors during the budgeting process help clarify the goals and methods of the subordinate. They report evidence that budget participation reduces the role ambiguity of the subordinate, which, in turn, leads to higher job performance. Prior studies also report evidence that role ambiguity affects organizational commitment (e.g., Welsch & LaVan, 1981); consequently, role ambiguity may be an intervening variable in the relation between budget participation and organizational commitment. Prior research suggests links between role ambiguity and all the variables (budget participation, organizational commitment, job performance) theorized by the current study to be connected to upward information sharing. To properly specify the relations between these variables, role ambiguity is included in the theoretical model. To assess the theoretical framework, a questionnaire was administered to 70 managers and supervisors in several manufacturing firms in the United States. In general, the results of path analysis support the hypothesized relations. Regarding upward communication during the budgeting process, statistical results reveal a positive and significant association between information sharing and the proposed antecedents: budget participation and organizational commitment. Information sharing, in turn, is significantly associated with individual job performance. Regarding downward communication, the results suggest that budget participation influences role ambiguity which, in turn, influences job performance. Role ambiguity is also directly linked to organizational commitment. Several indirect effects involving upward information sharing also are statistically significant. Both budget participation and organizational commitment have an indirect effect on job performance through information sharing. Also, role ambiguity has an indirect effect on information sharing through organizational commitment. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the literature is reviewed and hypotheses are developed. The third section presents the methodology. The fourth section ana28 R.J. Parker, L. Kyj / Accounting, Organizations and Society 31 (2006) 27–45 lyzes the results and the last section concludes with a discussion of the implications. Theoretical development and hypotheses To recap, vertical information sharing during the budget process involves the communication of information between superior and subordinate. Prior studies in the accounting literature have explored two dimensions of this communication: (1) flow of information from the subordinate to the superior (upward information sharing); (2) flow of information from the superior to the subordinate (downward information sharing). Each dimension is discussed separately. The proposed theoretical model with the related hypotheses is presented in Fig. 1. Upward information sharing Many accounting studies in this area are based upon an agency framework that assumes two primary actors, the principal and the agent. The principal hires the agent to perform a task on the behalf of the principal. In an organizational context, the principal is often portrayed as an executive who delegates responsibility for certain tasks to a subordinate who functions as an agent. As Baiman (1990) notes, agency models assume that the agent has ‘‘private’’ information about the agents area of responsibility. The information is private in the sense that the principal can not acquire the information or the principal can acquire it only by incurring significant monitoring costs. The difference between agent and principal in information levels is termed information asymmetry. Using an agency framework, several papers propose that budget participation allows subordinates to reveal their private information, which, in turn, leads to better performance by the individual and economic gains for the organization (e.g., Baiman & Evans, 1983; Christensen, 1982; Penno, 1984; Nouri & Parker, 1998). According to Shields and Young (1993), one of the primary reasons that companies use participative budgeting is to facilitate the communication of private information from subordinates to superiors (also see Shields & Shields, 1998). Shields Fig. 1. Theoretical model. R.J. Parker, L. Kyj / Accounting, Organizations and Society 31 (2006) 27–45 29 and Young (1993) report evidence that suggests information asymmetry is an antecedent of budget participation. In their sample, the larger the difference in information levels between subordinate and superior, the higher the probability that the subordinate participates in the budgeting process. According to Simons (1995), the budgeting (profit planning) system can be used to gather private information from subordinates about the strategic uncertainties confronting the organization. Strategic uncertainties are ‘‘the uncertainties and contingencies that could threaten or invalidate the current strategy of the business (Simons, 1995, p. 94).’’ They include things such as competitor actions, changes in consumer preferences, and technological changes. Middle and lower level managers represent an important source of information about uncertainties and methods for dealing with them. Disclosure of such information may lead to revisions of organizational strategy in a process that Simons (1995) calls the ‘‘emergent’’ approach to strategy formation because strategy emerges from lower levels of the organization. Top management can tap critical information held by lower management through interactive control systems that promote active and open dialogue between organizational levels. As Simons (1995) notes, budgeting systems may be used on an interactive basis to encourage discussions between superiors and subordinates that result in information sharing. While Simons (1995) focuses on organizational systems in his writings, his ideas also may be applicable at the individual level. Within an organization, those subordinates who have interactive dialogue with their superiors in the budgeting process may reveal critical information about strategic uncertainties. Regarding the nature of information sharing by the subordinate during the budgeting process, empirical evidence is sparse in the accounting literature. One of the few empirical studies in this area is Nouri and Parker (1998) which argues that subordinates often have private information about the budgetary support required to perform their tasks. Through budgetary participation, the subordinate may ‘‘incorporate this information into the budget to ensure that they have adequate resources to successfully perform their duties’’ (p. 469). In their sample, budget participation is linked to budgetary support. (Magner et al., 1996) propose that budget participation allows subordinates the opportunity to reveal private information which leads to higher quality budgets, i.e., budgets that more accurately represent future conditions in the subordinates work environment. In the sample of Magner et al. (1996), budget participation is highly correlated with perceived budget quality. While many accounting studies assume that budget participation leads to upward information sharing (e.g., Brownell & Dunk, 1991; Magner et al., 1996; Mia, 1989; Nouri & Parker, 1998), none, to the knowledge of the authors, directly examine the relation between participation and information sharing. A similar situation exists in the management and applied psychology literatures involving participatory decision-making (PDM) Cognitive studies in this area argue that PDM ‘‘enhances the flow and use of important information in organizations’’ (Miller & Monge, 1986, p. 770). These studies assume that subordinates have more information about their work than do their superiors and, that through PDM, subordinates reveal such information. As Miller and Monge (1986) note in their literature review, such studies assume information sharing but do not directly assess it. The current study proposes and tests a direct relation between budget participation and upward information sharing. As defined by Brownell (1982b), budget participation is the process in which individuals ‘‘are involved in, and have influence on,’’ the setting of budgets that directly affect the individual (p. 124). High participation includes frequent and wide ranging discussions between superiors and subordinates about budgeting issues (Milani, 1975). The frequency and scope of such discussions provide subordinates with many opportunities to share their insights (i.e., their private information) with superiors; consequently, the likelihood increases that the subordinate will communicate private information. This suggests the following hypothesis: 30 R.J. Parker, L. Kyj / Accounting, Organizations and Society 31 (2006) 27–45 H1: Budget participation and upward information sharing have a positive relation. While involvement in the budget process may facilitate the communication of private information, such involvement does not ensure it. A subordinate involved in the budgeting process may withhold, or even distort, private information if this personally benefits the subordinate. As Hopwood (1976) notes, ‘‘For although [budget] participation may result in an exchange of information, its accuracy is known to be dependent upon the motives of lower management (p. 86).’’ Organizational commitment may motivate managers to fully reveal their information; consequently, commitment is included in the proposed theoretical model. Meyer and Allen (1997) describe organizational commitment ‘‘as a psychological state linking the employee to their organizations’’ (p. 23). As noted by Mathieu and Zajac (1990), the most common conceptualization of organizational commitment is affective (attitudinal) commitment which is used in the current study. Affective commitment is characterized by: (1) strong belief in the goals and values of the organization; (2) willingness to exert considerable effort to help the organization to reach its goals; and (3) strong desire to maintain organizational membership (Angle & Perry, 1981; Mowday, Porter, & Steers, 1982; Porter, Steers, Mowday, & Boulian, 1974). For individuals who are committed to their organization, the desire to achieve organizational goals extends beyond personal interests in acquiring tangible organizational rewards such as income or promotion (Lincoln & Kalleberg, 1990). Committed individuals exhibit a ‘‘willingness to aid the organization even if direct reward is not contingent upon that aid’’ (Moorman, Niehoff, & Organ, 1993, p. 211). Committed employees identify with organizational success. Based upon analytic models, Alles and Datar (2002) argue that identification with organizational success may encourage the employee to share information even at the expense of sacrificing slack. According to the proposed theoretical framework in the current study, individuals with high commitment are more likely to reveal private information during the budgeting process. Such information could benefit the organization and, for committed individuals, organizational success is important. This suggests the following hypothesis: H2: Organizational commitment and upward information sharing have a positive relation. Besides examining potential antecedents of information sharing, this study also investigates a possible outcome, individual job performance. Accounting researchers have theorized that information sharing influences job performance in a number of ways. Magner et al. (1996) propose that the revelation of private information by subordinates results in more realistic plans and more accurate budgets that, in turn, may result in higher performance. Murray (1990) argues that the disclosure of private information may enable the superior to help develop better strategies for the subordinate. Sharing information also may ensure that the subordinate receives adequate budgetary support (Nouri & Parker, 1998). Based upon these arguments, the following hypothesis is proposed: H3: Upward information sharing has a positive relation with job performance. To recap, the current study proposes links between information sharing and several variables: budget participation, organizational commitment, and job performance. To properly specify this model of information sharing, potential links between participation, commitment, and performance must be included (see Fig. 1). Regarding the relation between budget participation and organizational commitment, several researchers in management and psychology have proposed that employee involvement in decisionmaking increases commitment. According to this viewpoint, if employees are allowed to participate in organizational decision-making, employees will identify with their organizations (e.g., March & Simon, 1958). Studies that report a significant positive relation between employee participation and organizational commitment include: Boshoff and Mels (1995), DeCotiis and Summers (1987), R.J. Parker, L. Kyj / Accounting, Organizations and Society 31 (2006) 27–45 31 Morris and Steers (1980), Rhodes and Steers (1981), Welsch and LaVan (1981), Zahra (1984). One form of employee participation that is particularly relevant to accounting research is budget participation. A statistically significant link between budget participation and organizational commitment is reported in two accounting studies: Nouri and Parker (1998); Quirin, Donnelly, and OBrian (2000). This suggests the following hypothesis: H4: Budget participation and organizational commitment have a positive relation. Regarding the relation between organizational commitment and individual performance, many researchers in the management and applied psychology fields argue that commitment increases individual performance (see reviews by Mathieu & Zajac, 1990; Meyer & Allen, 1997; Randall, 1990). Researchers theorize that commitment leads to higher motivation, which, in turn, leads to higher performance (Meyer & Allen, 1997). According to Meyer and Allen (1997), the empirical evidence supports the theory although not in all cases. In the accounting literature, several studies report evidence that organizational commitment is positively linked to performance (e.g., Ferris, 1981; Ferris & Larcker, 1983; Nouri & Parker, 1998). Accordingly, this study proposes: H5: Organizational commitment and job performance have a positive relation. Downward information sharing Hopwood (1976) is among the first accounting researchers to propose that the budget process can function as a communication mechanism whereby subordinates obtain more information about their jobs. Chenhall and Brownell (1988) are among the first researchers to empirically examine this possibility. They argue that, through budget participation, subordinates gain information that helps clarify their organizational roles including their duties, responsibilities, and expected performance. Empirical evidence in Chenhall and Brownell (1988) suggests that budget participation is linked to role ambiguity. Also, in the psychology and organizational behavior literatures, several studies report evidence of a relation between participatory decision-making and role ambiguity (see meta-analysis by Jackson & Schuler, 1985). Prior research suggests the following hypothesis: H6: Budget participation and role ambiguity have a negative relation. Regarding the consequences of role ambiguity, two possible outcomes are relevant to the proposed theoretical model: lower organizational commitment and lower job performance (see Fig. 1). Regarding organizational commitment, several studies propose that role ambiguity lowers commitment (e.g., DeCotiis & Summers, 1987; Morris & Koch, 1979; Welsch & LaVan, 1981). As Welsch and LaVan (1981) argue, if a job is ‘‘unclear as to its expectations, ... organizational commitment will necessarily suffer since the employee is not given the opportunity to integrate himself or herself into the position or organization’’ (p. 1081– 1082). In their meta-analysis of organizational commitment, Mathieu and Zajac (1990) conclude that prior studies demonstrate a significant negative association between role ambiguity and organizational commitment. This suggests the following: H7: Role ambiguity and organizational commitment have a negative relation. Role ambiguity may also lead to lower job performance. High role ambiguity indicates that an employee is uncertain about his/her role within the organization. This includes uncertainty about organizational expectations and the means to fulfill them. Based upon expectancy theory, Beehr, Walsh, and Taber (1976) argue that role ambiguity decreases performance by reducing the expectation that strong effort leads to performance. Also, according to Chenhall and Brownell (1988), individuals who do not fully understand their duties and responsibilities, i.e., those with high role ambiguity, ‘‘will hesitate to make decisions and will rely on learning by trial and error’’ (p. 226). In Chenhall and Brownell (1988) and several prior studies cited by them, empirical evidence suggests that role ambiguity has a significant negative association 32 R.J. Parker, L. Kyj / Accounting, Organizations and Society 31 (2006) 27–45 with individual performance. Accordingly, the following hypothesis is proposed: H8: Role ambiguity and job performance have a negative relation. Discussion As argued by several accounting researchers, subordinates have important private information that, if shared with their superiors, may benefit the subordinate and the organization (e.g., Magner et al., 1996; Nouri & Parker, 1998; Shields & Shields, 1998; Simons, 1995). Some researchers further argue that budget participation may enable subordinates to communicate such information upward to their superiors (e.g., Baiman & Evans, 1983; Christensen, 1982; Magner et al., 1996; Nouri & Parker, 1998; Penno, 1984; Shields & Shields, 1998; Simons, 1995). While these researchers propose a relation between budget participation and information sharing, they do not directly test the proposition. The current study empirically examines the relation and finds evidence suggesting a direct link. Measuring information sharing during the budgeting process allows for not only an empirical test of the relation between budget participation and information sharing, but also the examination of other potential antecedents of information sharing. For example, results of the current study suggest that, besides budget participation, organizational commitment is an important antecedent of information sharing. Those subordinates who are highly committed are more likely to reveal Table 6 Analysis of indirect effects Indirect effect Indirect effect coefficient Standard deviation of coefficient t-value BP on OC .3176 .1229 2.58*** BP on IS .0254 .0155 1.64* BP on JP via RA .0688 .0472 1.46* via OC .0066 .0269 0.25 via IS .1637 .0950 1.72** RA on IS .0761 .0264 2.88*** RA on JP .0748 .0948 0.79 OC on JP .0511 .0290 1.76** n = 70. Same abbreviations as in Table 3. Unstandardized path coefficients were used to calculate indirect effects. Indirect effects and their associated t-values were calculated using the techniques recommended by Sobel (1982). All t-tests are one tailed tests. No star t-value has p-value greater than .10. ***t-value has p-value less than .01. **t-value has p-value between .01 and .05. *t-value has p-value between .05 and .10. Table 7 Results of simultaneous equation model (3-stage least squares) Dependent variable Independent variables Coefficient z-Statistic p-value R-Square Equation 1 .29 JP BP .101 0.87 * RA .233 1.77 .077 OC .018 0.23 * IS .723 2.18 .029 Equation 2 .46 IS BP .201 6.08 .001 OC .071 3.28 .001 Equation 3 .42 OC BP .041 0.28 * RA 1.077 6.67 .001 Equation 4 .10 RA BP .295 2.86 .004 n = 70. Same abbreviations as in Table 3. *p-value greater than .10. The p-values are associated with one sided tests which is consistent with the hypotheses. 40 R.J. Parker, L. Kyj / Accounting, Organizations and Society 31 (2006) 27–45 their private information. Prior studies have not investigated organizational commitment in this role. Regarding the relation between budget participation and organizational commitment, the results of the current study suggest that an indirect link exists. A few studies (e.g., Nouri & Parker, 1998; Quirin et al., 2000) report evidence that budget participation increases organizational commitment; however, results in this study suggest that the relation between budget participation and organizational commitment is fully mediated by a previously unexamined intervening variable, role ambiguity. Results also suggest links between organizational commitment, information sharing, and job performance. As theorized, the direct path between information sharing and individual performance is statistically significant. Concerning the relation between organizational commitment and job performance, numerous studies in applied psychology, organizational behavior, and management propose that organizational commitment leads to higher individual performance (see reviews by: Meyer & Allen, 1997; Randall, 1990). Several prior accounting studies also theorize a link between commitment and performance (Ferris, 1981; Ferris & Larcker, 1983; Nouri & Parker, 1998; Quirin et al., 2000). In the current study, results suggest that organizational commitment is not directly linked to performance; instead, organizational commitment has a significant indirect effect on performance through information sharing. In other words, information sharing fully mediates the relation between commitment and performance. To the knowledge of the authors, no prior studies have examined this possibility. In the applied psychology, organizational behavior, and management literatures, prior studies assume that commitment leads to higher work effort or motivation, which, in turn leads to higher performance (see Meyer & Allen, 1997, Chapter 3). The results of the current study may interest researchers in these related disciplines. The current study includes role ambiguity in the modeling of information sharing. Results reveal that budget participation is inversely linked to role ambiguity, which, in turn, is negatively linked to performance. This is consistent with findings reported by Chenhall and Brownell (1988). Extending their model, the current study also proposes that role ambiguity adversely affects organizational commitment, which, in turn, influences information sharing. Statistical results support this. The results involving role ambiguity (lower commitment, less information sharing, lower performance) are congruent with the ideas of Simons (1995). In his framework, role ambiguity could be considered an organizational ‘‘block’’ that frustrates opportunities for individual achievement and contribution to the organization (Chapter 2). Based in part upon the work of Lawrence and Dyer (1983), Simons (1995) argues that organizational members must clearly understand organizational expectations if they are to share information that leads to organizational learning and innovation. There are a number of research issues related to information sharing in the budgeting process that could be investigated in the future. For example, information sharing may positively affect not only subordinate performance but also organizational performance. Disclosure of private information by subordinates may facilitate coordination between organizational subunits (Kanodia, 1993) and lead to better resource allocation among subunits (Shields & Young, 1993). As noted previously, Simons (1995) argues that subordinates have private information about strategic uncertainties and methods for dealing with them. Revealing this information could lead to improvements of existing strategy or completely new strategies that benefit the organization. Another issue for future research is the linkage between budget participation, organizational justice (fairness), and information sharing in the budgeting process. Several accounting researchers (e.g., Libby, 1999; Lindquist, 1995) argue that the form and extent of budget participation influences the individuals perceptions of organization fairness. Perceptions of organizational fairness, in turn, may influence the willingness of the individual to share private information in the budgeting process. The results of the current study are subject to the usual limitations of survey research. The results may be sample specific. The scales used to R.J. Parker, L. Kyj / Accounting, Organizations and Society 31 (2006) 27–45 41 measure the constructs may have measurement error. 4 Also, there may be omitted variables in the theoretical model. Finally, cross-sectional research of the type in this paper can not prove causality.

PAPER 3: Hannan, R. L., Rankin, F. W., & Towry, K. L. (2010). Flattening the organization: the effect of organizational reporting structure on budgeting effectiveness. Review of Accounting Studies, 15(3), 503–536. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11142-010-9132-5

Flattening the organization: the effect of organizational reporting structure on budgeting effectiveness R. Lynn Hannan • Frederick W. Rankin • Kristy L. Towry Published online: 1 May 2010 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010 Abstract This study investigates whether increasing a superior’s span of control improves the effectiveness of the budgeting process. We characterize the superior’s utility function as consisting of utilities for norm enforcement and wealth, leading the superior to reject profitable projects believed to contain excessive slack. We develop theory to predict that superiors become more willing to reject projects as their span of control increases. Further, subordinates anticipate superiors’ behavior and reduce slack as span of control increases. Experimental results are consistent with these predictions. As span of control increases, superiors show a greater willingness to reject projects that they believe contain excessive slack, and subordinates submit budgets with less slack. The net result is that superiors earn more profit per subordinate under an expanded span of control. Our study suggests that increasing span of control can improve the effectiveness of the budgeting process, an important component of most firms’ control environments. Keywords Capital budgeting Organizational structure Informal management control systems Norm enforcement JEL Classification D02 D03 D82 M40 M55 R. L. Hannan (&) J. Mack Robinson College of Business, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 3989, Atlanta, GA 30302, USA e-mail: rhannan@gsu.edu F. W. Rankin College of Business, Colorado State University, 255 Rockwell Hall, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA e-mail: bill.rankin@business.colostate.edu K. L. Towry Goizueta Business School, Emory University, 1300 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA e-mail: kristy_towry@bus.emory.edu 123 Rev Account Stud (2010) 15:503–536 DOI 10.1007/s11142-010-9132-5 1 Introduction In most organizations, budgeting plays a crucial role in planning and control, resource allocation, and coordination. Accordingly, budgeting issues and problems are extensively researched in managerial accounting. Much of this research focuses on participatory budgeting, a tool that a superior can use to elicit information from better-informed subordinates. Prior studies have examined a number of issues, including the factors that influence the effectiveness of participatory budgeting and the behavioral consequences of participation. While most prior research focuses on the participatory dyad (that is, the superior and the subordinate), our study addresses the influence of organizational structure on the effectiveness of participatory budgeting. Specifically, we examine the effect of increasing a superior’s span of control (that is, the number of subordinates reporting to the superior, and by logical extension, the span of operations controlled by the superior) on the level of slack subordinates report in the budgeting process. We provide theory and experimental evidence to suggest that increasing the span of control can reduce the level of slack in subordinates’ budgets because of the superior’s preference to enforce social norms.1 Thus we demonstrate a benefit to increasing the span of control that has not been identified previously. Much of the prior organizational design research assumes that increasing the span of control weakens the control environment (Simon 1957; Williamson 1967; Leavitt 2005). Even the popular press describes ‘‘one inescapable fact about flatter organizations: The more you flatten, the less you control’’ (Henricks 2005, p. 70). The view that increasing the span of control diminishes control effectiveness is based primarily on the notion that the superior cannot effectively monitor many subordinates concurrently. Although reduced monitoring effectiveness can be a cost of increasing the span of control, we investigate a potential benefit, which occurs in a participatory budgeting context. We demonstrate that increasing the span of control can improve the effectiveness of the participatory budgeting process, thereby strengthening this important aspect of the control environment. This research is important to scholars interested in internal control, budgeting, and organizational design issues, as well as to the practitioners who determine organizational structures and establish managerial control systems. Empirical and anecdotal evidence suggests that firms are flattening their organizational structures (Henricks 2005; Rajan and Wulf 2006). Because budgeting is a central component of most firms’ control systems, it is important to understand the effect of changes in organizational structures on budgeting effectiveness. Specifically, if flattening the organization improves the effectiveness of a formal control mechanism such as budgeting, this may change the optimal design of the organization and the management control system. Therefore, such an understanding can lead to improved control and ultimately better firm performance. Our research also provides useful information for the organizational design problem. In designing a firm’s 1 Although there are instances in which slack may be beneficial to the organization—for example in encouraging strategies that require innovation and experimentation or as a means of protection against the downside of an uncertain future (Merchant and Manzoni 1989; Van der Stede 2000)—in our setting slack is harmful because it represents the appropriation of rents by the subordinate. 504 R. L. Hannan et al. 123 organizational structure, directors and senior managers must trade off the benefits and costs of tall (that is, relatively many levels and small span of control) vs. flat (relatively few levels and large span of control) organizations. Our research informs this tradeoff by demonstrating a previously unexplored advantage of flatter organizations. We develop our hypotheses in a simple capital budgeting setting, in which subordinates submit budgets for proposed projects, and the superior can either fund or reject these projects.2 As will be described in detail, our theory hinges on the notion that for each subordinate, the superior derives utility from either wealth (by accepting the project) or enforcing a social norm (by rejecting the project if it is perceived to incorporate excessive slack). This characterization of the superior’s utility function is in stark contrast to the typical assumption made in the agencybased literature. The interplay of the two sources of utility, together with diminishing marginal utility for wealth, is the foundation of our prediction that the superior will be more willing to reject proposed projects under an expanded span of control. We further predict that, as a result, subordinates under an expanded span of control will incorporate less slack in their budgets. We test our hypotheses experimentally. Participants act as superiors and subordinates involved in capital budgeting. We manipulate the span of control by varying the number of subordinates responsible to a superior.3 The experimental results are consistent with our predictions with regard to the behavior of both superiors and subordinates. That is, under an expanded span of control, superiors show a greater willingness to reject projects that they believe include excessive slack, and subordinates incorporate less slack in their budgets. The overall result of these two effects is that, as the span of control is increased, superiors earn higher average profit per subordinate. We also conduct a second experiment, which provides corroborating evidence to support our theory. The experimental method is particularly useful for our investigation because it allows us to systematically manipulate the variables of interest while holding all other factors constant. That is, by holding constant such factors as information asymmetry and monitoring effectiveness, we can make strong inferences regarding the causal mechanism for the reduced slack. Further, through the systematic manipulation of span of control, we can address the endogeneity of organizational design. Determinants of organizational structures include factors such as human vs. capital intensity (Rajan and Zingales 2001), technology (Rajan and Wulf 2006), and the level of diversification (Harris and Raviv 2002). The very existence of these factors makes it difficult to use archival data to ascertain how the resulting organizational structures affect budgeting effectiveness. This paper contributes to the accounting literature in several important ways. Our results add to the growing evidence that socially-mediated controls can enhance or even substitute for explicit controls (Evans et al. 2001; Sprinkle 2003; Coletti et al. 2 For expositional purposes, we refer to the owner and manager as the superior and subordinate, respectively. 3 In our setting, each subordinate proposes exactly one project. Therefore, increasing the number of subordinates simultaneously increases the span of operations (i.e., number of projects) controlled by the superior. The effect of organizational reporting structure on budgeting effectiveness 505 123 2005; Hannan 2005; Hannan et al. 2006). In our study, the superior’s willingness to incur a cost in order to enforce social norms serves as an informal control. This, in turn, reduces the need for explicit formal controls, particularly as the span of control increases. In addition, our study addresses the call for accounting research that investigates multi-person environments (Baiman 1990; Sprinkle 2003). Our experimental findings suggest that prior single subordinate studies may underestimate the importance of social factors in eliciting truthful reports. Thus, while prior experimental studies demonstrate that preferences for social factors such as honesty and fairness reduce the need for explicit formal controls, we show that this reduction is even greater in the multi-subordinate setting. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we develop the hypotheses by describing the setting, reviewing the relevant literature, and proposing a refined theory of the budgeting process. Section 3 describes the method and Sect. 4 presents the results of Experiment 1. Section 5 describes and presents the results of Experiment 2. The final section provides a discussion. 2 Hypotheses development 2.1 Prior literature: span of control We are aware of no prior studies that specifically examine the effect of increasing the span of control on the effectiveness of the budgeting process. However, a significant body of research has examined organizational design issues, including the determination of the optimal span of control (for example, Calvo and Wellisz 1978; Keren and Levhari 1979). These studies generally assume that increasing the span of control will lead to a loss of control (for example, Leavitt 2005). For example, Williamson (1967) argues that delegation leads to control loss because subordinates cannot fully satisfy their superiors’ expectations. Williamson goes on to recognize that, at any given layer in the organization, as the span of control increases the cumulative control loss is also likely to increase. Similarly, Simon (1957) recognizes that firms face a dilemma in determining the optimal span of control due to the tradeoff between the excessive red tape inherent in a restricted span and the limited ability to supervise too many subordinates in an expanded span. Other research also assumes that increasing the span of control will reduce the effectiveness of controls. This assumption is usually based on the supervisor’s limited ability to monitor the work of many subordinates simultaneously. For example, in examining the optimal span of control and wage differentials throughout the hierarchy, Qian (1994) models the probability of a supervisor checking a subordinate’s work as a decreasing function of the span of control. Colombo and Delmastro (1999) make the same argument, concluding that increasing the span of control will result in more shirking by subordinates. Singh (1985) argues that converting workers to supervisors (and thus decreasing the average span of control) will increase efficiency through better monitoring. In summary, the organizational design literature has generally assumed a negative relationship between span of control and control effectiveness. 506 R. L. Hannan et al. 123 While not explicitly examining the effects of span of control on control effectiveness, research in accounting also provides results that are potentially relevant to the topic. Specifically, the principal-agent literature examines several features of the multi-agent setting, which, if incorporated into the employment contract, can serve as control mechanisms. It is possible that these contractual mechanisms, such as peer monitoring, relative performance evaluation, and competition for scarce resources, become more valuable as the superior’s span of control increases (for example, Frederickson 1992; Balakrishnan 1995; Arya et al. 1996). We extend this research to behavioral mechanisms, providing theory and experimental evidence to suggest that increasing the span of control can reduce the level of slack in subordinates’ budgets through the effects of social norm enforcement.4 2.2 Setting Our setting is a modification of the capital budgeting setting used in a number of recent experimental studies (for example, Evans et al. 2001; Hannan et al. 2006; Rankin et al. 2008). In our setting, the superior has a portfolio of projects from which to choose and sufficient means to fund all projects in the portfolio. That is, capital is not rationed, and so there is no competition for scarce resources. Each project is proposed by a different subordinate, and the actual cost associated with each of the projects is stochastic. For simplicity, each project generates the same revenue. The actual surplus of each project is greater than or equal to zero for all possible realizations of the cost, and so if the superior is a profit maximizer, the superior should prefer funding the project to rejecting it.5 Revenue and the probability distribution over costs are common knowledge; however, only the subordinate ever knows the actual cost. Because of the subordinate’s private information, the superior uses participatory budgeting to elicit a ‘‘cost report’’ (that is, budget) from the subordinate. Antle and Eppen (1985) assume that the superior’s utility function includes preferences for wealth only and show analytically that the superior’s profit is maximized when he or she sets an ex ante hurdle cost. If the subordinate’s cost report is less than or equal to the hurdle cost, then the project is funded, and the subordinate earns rents equal to the difference between the hurdle cost and the actual cost. However, if the subordinate’s cost report is greater than the hurdle cost, then the project is rejected. Rankin et al. (2003) provide experimental corroboration of Antle and Eppen’s result, demonstrating that allowing superiors to commit ex 4 Several experimental studies in accounting also investigate participatory budgeting in a multi-agent setting (for example, Waller and Bishop 1990; Chow et al. 1994; Fisher et al. 2002). However, these studies do not manipulate the span of control and thus do not provide evidence on the effect of span of control on budgeting effectiveness. 5 We assume that the superior is the residual claimant of the surplus. While we recognize that, in the organizational setting, there may be one or more hierarchical levels between the superior and the actual residual claimant, this technicality does not change the intuition of our analysis. That is, assuming that the superior is employed under a performance-based contract, the hierarchical setting implies that the superior is a partial claimant of the residual. Further, to the extent that the superior can limit the subordinate’s rent, it leaves more residual from which the superior can appropriate rents. The effect of organizational reporting structure on budgeting effectiveness 507 123 ante to a hurdle cost results in increased superior profits. The purpose of the current study, however, is to investigate the effect of span of control in settings in which the optimal hurdle contract is not feasible. It may not be feasible for a variety of reasons. First, the optimal contract solution requires that the superior commit ex ante to how he or she will use the subordinate’s cost report, and this assumption is unreasonable in many settings (Arya et al. 1997). Specifically, such commitment may be unattainable because it precludes an ex post renegotiation of the contract, even though both the superior and the subordinate prefer to renegotiate.6 Second, the Antle and Eppen model assumes that the superior has complete knowledge of the prior distribution of the possible costs. This is unlikely, because the distribution can be affected by myriad factors and it is difficult, if not impossible, to anticipate all possible contingencies. Third, there is empirical evidence that many firms set their hurdle rates below the cost of capital (Poterba and Summers 1995), suggesting that the budgeting process is more complex than that assumed in Antle and Eppen’s model. For example, Dutta and Fan (2009) show analytically that the quality of investment opportunities can affect the optimal hurdle point. For these reasons, we preclude superiors from using a hurdle contract in our setting. In our setting, in which the optimal hurdle contract is assumed to be infeasible, and under the assumption that both the superior and the subordinate have utility only for wealth, the subordinate would ‘‘hold up’’ the superior, by submitting the highest possible cost report. Hence, the subordinate would appropriate the entire surplus. This outcome suggests that regardless of the span of control (with independently determined costs and unlimited resources, as in our study), each subordinate holds up the superior. That is, reporting behavior is unaffected by the span of control. However, under the assumption that the superior also has utility for enforcing social norms, we predict that the span of control will influence the behavior of both superiors and subordinates. Below, we review the prior literature leading to the conclusion that the superior’s utility function includes preferences for enforcing social norms. 2.3 Prior literature: utility for enforcing social norms Following recent trends in behavioral economics to incorporate social preferences into formal models (for example, Rabin 1993; Fehr and Schmidt 1999; Bolton and Ockenfels 2000; Mittendorf 2006, 2008), we characterize the superior’s utility function as consisting of two components, a utility for wealth and a utility for enforcing social norms. Numerous experimental studies support the notion that individuals will incur a monetary cost to enforce social norms (See Camerer 2003; Gintis et al. 2003 for reviews). In fact, experimental studies (Kahneman et al. 1986; 6 In Rankin et al. (2003), the experimenter acted as a third party who designed a device to ensure the superiors’ commitment. In their binding-announcement (commitment) treatment, superiors announced a hurdle cost and then subordinates reported costs. The software made the superiors’ announcements binding by automatically accepting projects when the reported cost was less than or equal to the hurdle cost and rejecting projects when the reported cost was greater than the hurdle cost. That is, the software did not allow the superiors to act after receiving the subordinates’ cost reports; hence, ex post renegotiation was essentially prohibited by an authority (the experimenter) other than the superior. 508 R. L. Hannan et al. 123 Fehr and Fischbacher 2004) find that even third parties, who are themselves unaffected economically by the actions of other experimental participants, will incur a monetary cost to punish participants who violate social norms. De Quervain et al. (2004) provide neurological evidence of a utility for enforcing social norms. Specifically, they find evidence that punishing behavior leads to activation of the dorsal striatum. This part of the brain has been shown to process decision-related rewards (O’Doherty et al. 2004). In other words, individuals appear to experience satisfaction when they punish another person for violating a social norm. These findings provide strong evidence that individuals receive utility from punishing others who violate social norms.7 We argue that the superior’s utility for enforcing a social norm is both separable by and specific to the subordinate. In other words, if a subordinate is perceived to have violated a social norm by incorporating excess slack into the budget, the superior will receive utility from rejecting that subordinate’s project but not from rejecting any other subordinate’s project. The concept of separability is based on the notion that societies place great importance on individual responsibility for adhering to social norms. In fact, socialization, through which an individual becomes a member of a group, is defined as the process through which the individual adopts the group’s norms (Schaefer 2004). That is, an individual’s ability and willingness to adhere to a group’s norms forms the basis of eligibility for membership in the group. If individuals are held responsible for adhering to social norms, it is reasonable to expect that the utility for enforcing these norms would be specific to the individual as well. The notion of separability is consistent with the current state of the literature. Specifically, Fehr and Schmidt (1999) and Falk and Fischbacher (2006) model utility for equity and reciprocity, respectively, as separable by individual, and experimental evidence is generally consistent with the utility functions proposed in these papers (for example Falk et al. 2005; Falk and Fischbacher 2005). Although separability has not been explicitly tested, Falk and Fischbacher (2005) review the relevant literature and conclude that, in building a model of reciprocity (and retribution) involving more than two players, the best approach assumes separability. 2.4 Prior literature: ultimatum games Our setting is similar in structure to the ultimatum game, which has been extensively studied in the experimental economics literature. In an ultimatum game, a proposer (analogous to the subordinate in our setting) makes an offer to a 7 In the real world, individuals may choose to enforce social norms not only because they receive intrinsic utility from doing so, but also because there are explicit advantages associated with enforcing norms (such as the value of a reputation). In fact, research using group selection models suggests that the human tendency to punish is evolutionarily adaptive, in that it sustains cooperation, and cooperative groups are less prone to extinction than uncooperative groups. That is, the intrinsic utility for enforcing norms has evolved because there are explicit advantages to enforcing norms. In this way, the constructs of utility from norm enforcement vs. the explicit advantages of norm enforcement are closely related. However, as described in the method section, we design our experiment to isolate the effects of the intrinsic utility from norm enforcement. The effect of organizational reporting structure on budgeting effectiveness 509 123 responder (that is, the superior) for a portion of a sum of money (that is, the surplus). If the responder accepts, he or she receives the amount of the offer and the proposer receives the residual share of the surplus; if the responder rejects, both parties receive nothing. (See Roth (1995) for a survey of the ultimatum game literature.) Although our budgeting setting is similar in structure to the ultimatum game, a distinguishing feature is the role of private information. Specifically, in our budgeting setting the subordinate has private information regarding project cost, which determines the size of the surplus. Several studies have investigated ultimatum games in settings, such as ours, in which the responder is uncertain about the size of the surplus (for example, Kagel et al. 1996; Rapoport and Sundali 1996). Unlike our study, however, these studies investigate single proposer settings only. In fact, to our knowledge, the only published study that investigates ultimatum games with multiple proposers is by Roth et al. (1991), who investigate a context in which only one proposal can be accepted. That is, there is explicit competition among proposers, while in our setting all proposals can be accepted. Two published studies in accounting use an ultimatum game structure in a capital budgeting context. Both of these investigate only single-subordinate contexts and compare settings in which either the superior or the subordinate has final authority over project funding. When the superior has final authority, the structure is analogous to an ultimatum game. As mentioned earlier, Rankin et al. (2003) find that allowing superiors to commit ex ante to a hurdle cost results in higher superior profit (vs. allowing subordinates to have final authority). Rankin et al. (2008) investigate the effect of requiring a subordinate to make a factual assertion of the project’s cost and find that profit is lowest when the subordinate is not required to make a factual assertion and the subordinate has final authority. Profit is equal across all other conditions. Our study is different from both of these studies in that we investigate the effects of span of control within a setting in which (1) subordinates make a factual assertion and (2) the superior has final authority. Thus we investigate whether span of control matters in a setting similar to that of a capital budgeting context in that the cost report is a factual assertion and the superior may reject funding the project. 2.5 Hypothesis: superior behavior We now apply the findings from the prior literature to our capital budgeting setting in order to develop theory suggesting that, as the span of control increases, the superior’s willingness to reject projects also increases. We propose that, for each subordinate, the superior derives utility from either wealth (by accepting the project) or the enforcement of a social norm (by rejecting the project if it is perceived to incorporate excessive slack).8 If the superior perceives that the budget does not 8 We are intentionally vague in our use of the term ‘‘excessive.’’ What constitutes excessive slack will likely vary by institution and individual. Prior research finds that factors such as ethics (Luft 1997; Stevens 2002), fairness (Evans et al. 2001), social pressure (Young 1985), targets (Newman 2010), and the appearance of honesty (Hannan et al. 2006) affect the level of slack in subordinates’ budgets, suggesting that individual and organizational factors influence the acceptable level of slack. That is, social norms may allow for a positive level of slack. However, because the superior is the residual claimant and 510 R. L. Hannan et al. 123 incorporate excessive slack, the superior is expected to accept the project because, as described earlier, all projects earn positive profit. However, if the superior perceives excessive slack, the decision of whether to accept the project is essentially a tradeoff between the two sources of utility. As the cost reported for a proposed project increases (assuming constant revenue across projects), the wealth available to the superior from accepting the project decreases, while the perception of excessive slack strengthens. Therefore, as the reported cost increases, it becomes more likely that the superior will resolve this tradeoff in favor of utility for enforcing a social norm and reject the project. The characterization of the two sources of utility forms the basis of our predictions. We make the standard assumption that the utility for wealth increases at a decreasing rate. This assumption is pervasive in neoclassical economic theory and has been supported in experimental research.9 Further, because money is fungible, it is logical to assume that the superior’s utility for wealth is neither separable by, nor specific to, the subordinate. That is, the wealth received from accepting one subordinate’s project is combined cognitively with the wealth received from all other accepted projects. The utility for enforcing a social norm increases in the strength of the perception that a social norm has been violated. The notion of ‘‘strength of perception’’ comprises both magnitude and certainty. Specifically, the utility for enforcing a social norm increases with the perceived level of excessive slack, or, alternatively, with the degree of certainty that slack is excessive.10,11 As discussed earlier, and in contrast to the superior’s utility for wealth, we characterize the superior’s utility for enforcing a social norm as both separable by and specific to the subordinate. Therefore, the utility received from enforcing a social norm with one subordinate is unaffected by decisions made with regard to other subordinates. We describe a specific utility function in the Appendix to illustrate the intuition behind our predictions. Hypothesis 1 relies on the interplay between the two sources of utility. This interplay implies that, as the number of subordinates increases (and thus the stock of accepted projects increases), the marginal utility from wealth by accepting additional projects decreases, while the marginal utility from enforcing a social norm by rejecting the project is unaffected. Therefore, under an expanded span of Footnote 8 continued slack represents the appropriation of rents by the subordinate, the superior prefers less slack to more. For our purposes here, we assume that there is some acceptable level of slack and any amount greater than that is considered excessive. 9 Neoclassical economics generally equates diminishing marginal utility for wealth with risk aversion because they both arise through the concavity of the utility function. However, Rabin (2000) argues that the notion of risk aversion does not arise solely from the concavity of the utility function, and thus the two are separate theoretical constructs. Consistent with this notion, Horowitz et al. (2007) find evidence of diminishing marginal utility for wealth in a laboratory setting with small stakes and no risk. 10 As described in the Appendix, the utility may increase at an increasing, decreasing, or constant rate. 11 Experiments in ultimatum game settings (Kagel et al. 1996; Coats et al. 2009) show that, although individuals are willing to reject offers they suspect to be unfair, they are more willing to do so if they know the offers are unfair. This finding is consistent with our characterization of the utility for enforcing a social norm as increasing in the certainty that a norm has been violated. The effect of organizational reporting structure on budgeting effectiveness 511 123 control, it is more likely that the utility tradeoff discussed earlier will be resolved in favor of utility for enforcing a social norm, and thus the superior will be more willing to reject projects. This prediction is stated formally as Hypothesis 1: H1: Under an expanded span of control, the superior is more willing to reject projects. 2.6 Hypothesis: subordinate behavior Our second hypothesis relates to the reporting behavior of subordinates. While prior literature implies that social preferences such as honesty or fairness may influence the reporting behavior of subordinates, individual preferences such as these would not likely interact with span of control.12 Therefore, for purposes of our hypothesis development, we make the simplifying assumption that subordinates are wealth maximizers. Under this assumption, we predict that under an expanded span of control, subordinates will submit budgets with less slack. This prediction flows directly from Hypothesis 1. That is, if superiors are more willing to reject projects under an expanded span of control, then wealth-maximizing subordinates will incorporate less slack in their budgets under an expanded span of control. Of course, this logic assumes that subordinates have some degree of insight into superiors’ project acceptance decisions. Economists describe such insight as strategic anticipation, that is, the ability to anticipate another’s action and choose the best response given this expectation. Experimental results from ultimatum games (Roth et al. 1991; Winter and Zamir 2005) and budgeting settings (Rankin et al. 2003) provide evidence that individuals are adept at anticipating the behavior of others. Accordingly, we expect that subordinates will strategically anticipate the behavior of superiors and report lower project costs under an expanded span of control. This leads to our second hypothesis. H2: Under an expanded span of control, subordinates report lower project costs. 6 Discussion This study investigates whether increasing a superior’s span of control reduces the level of slack in a participatory budgeting setting. In contrast to prior accounting studies that investigate the value of contractual mechanisms in reducing slack, we extend this research to behavioral mechanisms. Specifically, we provide theory and experimental evidence to suggest that increasing the span of control can reduce the level of slack in subordinates’ budgets through the effects of social norm enforcement. Specifically, under an expanded span of control, superiors show a greater willingness to reject projects for which they believe slack is excessive. Further, subordinates respond by building less slack into their budgets. The net result of these two effects is that as the span of control is increased, superiors earn more profit per subordinate. In contrast to prior research that focuses on moral hazard (hidden action) problems and assumes a loss of control as the span of control is increased, our study demonstrates that increasing the span of control can actually strengthen control over a budgeting problem characterized by asymmetric information. Our results are especially relevant given the empirical and anecdotal evidence suggesting that firms are getting flatter over time. While the reason for this trend is unclear, authors conjecture a number of causes, including improvements in corporate governance, improved information technology, and even consulting fads (Rajan and Wulf 2006). Regardless of the motives firms have for flattening their organizations, our research provides evidence that with regard to the budgeting process, flattening the firm may actually improve an aspect of the control environment. Although our study finds that an expanded span of control results in reduced slack in our setting, this does not suggest that the net benefit of increasing the span of control is always positive. Our study isolates and investigates one path between span of control and slack, that of norm enforcement. The effect of this path likely occurs simultaneously with a number of other effects, the net of which cannot be unambiguously predicted.28 That is, the various effects of increasing the span of control are likely to vary across organizations due to different contextual factors. Therefore, the overall effect of increasing the span of control is unique to the individual organization. For example, prior organizational design research generally assumes that increasing the span of control reduces the superior’s ability to effectively monitor subordinates. In some organizations, monitoring effectiveness can be increased inexpensively through electronic systems. In such organizations, 28 In addition to the effects due to monitoring and norm enforcement, other effects of increasing the span of control are likely to exist. For example, increasing the span may affect information asymmetry, competition, peer pressure, relative performance evaluation, or motivation (as suggested by Williamson’s (2008) finding that giving managers more decision autonomy motivates them to work harder). Further, some of these effects may be nonlinear or even nonmonotonic. 526 R. L. Hannan et al. 123 the benefits of increasing the span of control (through the norm enforcement path) may outweigh the costs (through reduced monitoring effectiveness). In other organizations, where the cost associated with increased monitoring is prohibitive, the negative path due to reduced monitoring effectiveness may outweigh all others. Without identifying and understanding the individual paths, it would be difficult to assess the appropriate design of the organization or its control system. Our study informs the extant knowledge regarding one of these individual paths.

PAPER 4: Kramer, S., & Hartmann, F. (2014). How Top-down and Bottom-up Budgeting Affect Budget Slack and Performance through Social and Economic Exchange. Abacus, 50(3), 314–340. https://doi.org/10.1111/abac.12032

How Top-down and Bottom-up Budgeting Affect Budget Slack and Performance through Social and Economic Exchange This paper investigates the effects of a top-down (TD) versus bottom-up (BU) orientation in different stages of the budgetary target-setting process on slack and managerial performance. We use social exchange theory to explain the outcomes of these alternative budgetary arrangements, and complement the traditional focus on budgetary participation in target setting with a process-oriented perspective. We develop hypotheses predicting that TD and BU orientations in the subsequent stages of the budgeting process have different effects on managers’ exchange relationships with the firm, and their behavioural responses. Using survey evidence from German managers across 127 firms we find that a TD orientation in the issuance of guidelines enhances economic exchange and that a BU orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal enhances social exchange, which in turn are associated with reduced slack and higher performance, respectively. Key words: Budgeting; Target setting; Social exchange theory; Survey. The budgetary control cycle is an important and pervasive organizational process, but our academic understanding of its overall success or failure remains fairly limited (Luft and Shields, 2003; Shields and Shields, 1998). This is especially true for the impact of the separately identifiable steps in the budgetary target-setting process, which have, as yet, not been a topic of academic enquiry. The academic literature’s interest in budgetary target setting is traditionally directed at the subordinate manager’s interaction with his (her) immediate supervisor (Luft and Shields, 2003). These studies have typically examined how budgetary participation, Stephan Kramer (skramer@rsm.nl) is Assistant Professor of Management Accounting and Management Control and Frank Hartmann (fhartmann@rsm.nl) is Full Professor of Management Accounting and Management Control at Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. The authors are grateful to Jasmijn Bol, Werner Bruggeman, Jonas Gerdin, Stewart Jones, Victor Maas, Pascal Nevries, Paolo Perego, Marcel Van Rinsum, Steve Salterio, Utz Schäffer, David Smith, and Jürgen Weber; and participants at the 7th EIASM Conference on New Directions in Management Accounting 2010, the Global Management Accounting Research Symposium 2011, the workshop at the University of Sydney, RSM Erasmus University and WHU—Otto Beisheim School of Management for their helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. bs_bs_banner ABACUS, Vol. 50, No. 3, 2014 doi: 10.1111/abac.12032 314 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney that is, the amount of involvement and influence a manager is granted by his (her) immediate supervisor when determining budgetary targets, explains behavioural responses (Brownell, 1982; Shields and Shields, 1998). Those supervisor– subordinate interactions are embedded in a wider organizational process of budgetary target setting, which is however, typically designed and decided upon at a higher organizational level. We develop a theoretical framework that predicts individual behavioural responses elicited by the tightness versus looseness of the organizational process of budgetary target setting, which is distinctive of supervisor– subordinate interactions. As the analytical point of departure we choose the concepts of top-down (TD) and bottom-up (BU) budgeting, which denote, respectively, a tight and loose approach to budgetary target-setting process design. TD and BU budgeting are prominently discussed in the practitioner and vocational literatures (e.g., Lorange and Vancil, 1977; Merchant and Van der Stede, 2012); the practical origin of these terms, however, limits their immediate applicability for academic enquiry. In the first step of our analysis we break the target-setting process down into separately identifiable stages and develop an operational definition of TD and BU characteristics for each stage. To this aim, we integrate findings from the budgeting literature and an exploratory field study. In the second step of our analysis we use social exchange theory (Blau, 1964; Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005) to predict how a TD or BU orientation in each of the process stages affects managers’ interpretations of their exchange relationships with the firm. According to social exchange theory, these interpretations can be either social or economic, which in turn explain subsequent managerial behaviour. We focus on the two behaviours, budgetary slack creation and managerial performance, that are generally deemed crucial for measuring budgetary effectiveness (Luft and Shields, 2003). In particular, we expect that a dominance of TD budgeting characteristics in the issuance of guidelines enhances managers’ perceptions of an economic exchange relationship with the firm, defined by the clarification of the mutual provision of economic and tangible resources. This results in lower budgetary slack. In contrast, we expect that a dominance of BU budgeting characteristics in the development of the initial budget proposal and the negotiation of the final budget enhances managers’ perceptions of a social exchange relationship with the firm, defined by the mutual provision of socio-emotional resources, such as recognition and respect. This results in higher (self-reported) performance. This paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, we develop and empirically confirm a TD and BU typology of the budgeting process. This typology complements the literature’s focus on supervisor–subordinate interactions by procedural characteristics in the target-setting process. Second, we demonstrate that the effects of TD and BU on managerial performance and budgetary slack are mediated by managerial perceptions of the social or economic nature of the relationship with their company. Overall, our findings suggest that process characteristics of target setting can fruitfully complement the traditional perspective of budgetary participation in explaining budgetary outcomes. TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING 315 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney LITERATURE REVIEW The process of setting budgetary targets is considered to be a cornerstone of management control in most firms (Hansen et al., 2003). Through this process, organizations simultaneously lay the foundation for managerial performance evaluation, coordination of activities between managers at various levels and functions, and allocation of resources to individual managers (Fisher et al., 2002b; Hansen and Van der Stede, 2004).The budgetary target-setting process is typically intense, extends to managers across all levels of the organizational hierarchy, and involves several consecutive steps and procedures (Anthony and Govindarajan, 2007). The inherent complexity and comprehensiveness of this process causes its big impact on managers’ relationships with their firms. In particular, budgeting is not only meant to determine managers’ economic positions in the firm by specifying formal targets and allocating resources (Hansen and Van der Stede, 2004; Horngren et al., 2009). Extant evidence also suggests that budgeting practices can send different social signals, to the extent that managers’ inputs and opinions are taken into account during the process, thereby affecting managers’ feelings about, and attitudes towards, the firm (Kyj and Parker, 2008; Nouri and Parker, 1998; Shields and Shields, 1998). E.g., in a pioneering study of managerial responses to budgetary practices, Argyris (1952, p. 10) documents the ability of such practices to cause ‘fear, resentment, hostility, and aggression on the part of the employees toward the company [. . .] which may lead to decreased production’. While such responses are the likely consequence of the organization’s overall budgetary target-setting process, most research on this subject has adopted a different focus. More specifically, the majority of studies on budgetary target setting have concentrated on managers’ reactions to varying levels of budgetary participation (Shields and Shields, 1998). This construct denotes the amount of involvement and influence a manager is granted by his (her) immediate supervisor when determining budgetary targets (Brownell, 1982; Milani, 1975; Shields and Shields, 1998). Participative budgeting has been studied as an antecedent of managerial performance, using cognitive (Brownell, 1981; Chenhall and Brownell, 1988; Harrison, 1992; Kren, 1992) and motivational (Brownell and McInnes, 1986; Govindarajan, 1986; Kenis, 1979; Milani, 1975) theories to test its direct and indirect effects, for example, via trust (Lau and Buckland, 2001), fairness (Lau and Tan, 2006; Wentzel, 2002), commitment (Nouri and Parker, 1998), or job-relevant information (Kren, 1992). It has also been used to explain budgeting effectiveness, most prominently via slack building behaviour (Dunk, 1993; Govindarajan, 1986; Lau and Eggleton, 2003; Young, 1985). Overall, these studies explain only a modest amount of variance in budgetary effectiveness and managerial performance, as several overview and meta-analytic studies document (Derfuss, 2009; Dunk and Nouri, 1998; Shields and Shields, 1998; Wagner, 1994). One likely reason for this is the exclusive focus of budgetary participation studies on interactions within the supervisor–subordinate dyad (Shields and Shields, 1998). Budgetary target setting, however, spans the whole organization, and budgetary constraints may originate higher up in the organizational hierarchy and thus outside the scope of the supervisor–subordinate dyad (Merchant and ABACUS 316 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney Van der Stede, 2012; Shields, 2005). For example, if a superior is able to explain that a subordinate’s budget request has been overruled by restrictions from elsewhere, rather than by discretion, negative attitudes towards the firm, rather than towards the superior, may occur and cause a deterioration of the relationship with the firm and subsequent undesirable behaviour (e.g., Bies and Shapiro, 1988; Bies et al., 1988; Libby, 1999). This suggests that extant research on participation in budgetary target setting can be complemented by focusing on the managerial responses to the process design, rather than the interpersonal aspects, and by considering a corresponding theoretical perspective that is able to capture both the economic and social consequences of budgetary target-setting processes. Regarding the former, we propose to study TD and BU target setting to capture a factual notion of budgetary process design. Regarding the latter, we propose social exchange theory (SET) to document managers’ attitudinal and behavioural budgetary target-setting responses toward the organization (Coyle-Shapiro and Shore, 2007). SET is used to predict how the provision of tangible and socio-emotional resources by organizations shapes the perceptions that the employees have of their relationships with that organization. SET distinguishes two broad categories of relationships: those that are economic and those that are social in nature (Blau, 1964; Rupp and Cropanzano, 2002). An economic exchange relationship is focused on the exchange of material and tangible resources between the organization and its employees, such as working time for compensation (Shore et al., 2006). This type of exchange is transactional in nature and signifies the inherent self-interest of the exchanging parties (Coyle-Shapiro and Shore, 2007). It draws on an explicit understanding of mutual obligations and benefits, which are contracted and formalized ex-ante, and subject to formal control systems for rewards and punishments (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005). A social exchange relationship, instead, revolves around exchange of socioemotional resources, such as recognition, respect, and mutual support (Shore et al., 2006). Social exchange is relational in nature, and the well being of the other party dominates considerations of economic self-interest. Unlike in economic exchange relationships, mutual obligations are unspecified and diffuse under social exchange, rendering them unenforceable (Settoon et al., 1996). Social and economic exchange perceptions co-exist (Shore et al., 2006), and metaanalytical studies have consistently shown that employees reciprocate beneficial treatment by their organization with positive workplace behaviour, such as organizational commitment, job-related affect and job involvement, reduced withdrawal behaviour, and in- and extra-role performance (Blau, 1964; Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005; Rhoades and Eisenberger, 2002). However, the empirical evidence on drivers of social and economic exchange perceptions is sparse. Existing studies suggest that organizational design plays an important role in this respect: Song et al. (2009) report positive effects of transformational leadership, integrative culture and an employment approach of mutual investment on social exchange perceptions and subsequent employee commitment and task performance. Takeuchi et al. (2007) show that the positive effect of high performance work systems on organizational TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING 317 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney performance is mediated by social exchange perceptions. In line with the above findings, we propose the design of the budgetary target-setting process as reflected by TD and BU budgeting to be an important predictor of managers’ social and economic exchange relationships with their organization. DEFINING TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETARY PROCESSES The TD and BU labels are well established in the vocational literature and textbooks to describe alternative process design characteristics of budgetary target setting in practice (e.g., Lorange and Vancil, 1977; Merchant and Van der Stede, 2012; Umapathy, 1987). Lorange (1980, p. 69) describes TD and BU in terms of ‘the initiative and direction that top management gives to the planning process’. Lorange and Vancil (1977) refer to TD and BU budgeting as the level in the hierarchy that first suggests lower-level management’s goals. Kono (1976) characterizes TD and BU in terms of the hierarchical level that exerts authority over various aspects of goal setting, budget plan creation and budget approval. Töpfer (1978) and Anthony and Govindarajan (2007) outline that TD stands for global framework plans and guidelines set at top management level, which are subsequently used by lower-level management to develop their budget plans. While those descriptions provide an implicit notion of the characteristics of TD and BU budgeting, they lack the analytical and operational precision of a comprehensive account of the TD/BU typology required for academic enquiry. The academic literature refers to TD/BU either from an analytical perspective focusing on principal–agent relationships (e.g., Baiman and Evans, 1983; Baiman et al., 1990; Chen, 2003), or through the lens of experimental negotiations, which focus on superior–subordinate interactions (e.g., Fisher et al., 2000, 2002a,b, 2006). Neither address the procedural characteristics of budgetary target setting we focus on in our study. Therefore, we used Anthony and Govindarajan’s (2007, pp. 388–89) chronological typology of budgetary target-setting processes, which consists of four sequential stages: (1) the issuance of guidelines; (2) the development of an initial budget proposal; (3) budget negotiation; and (4) approval to complement insights from the literature with field interviews in each of the stages to develop a broader, yet analytically accurate, operational definition of the TD–BU typology. We conducted field interviews with a sample consisting of 10 large German firms from different industries. We selected firms that had a degree of formalization in budgeting, which would enable the identification of structural aspects in the target-setting process.We also aimed to enlarge the potential environmental and internal variance reflected in different budgeting processes across firms. Ten firms participated in our study, and their descriptive statistics are listed in Table 1. Within each firm, interviews were conducted with both the head of the management accounting department and one management accountant involved in the budgeting process. The interviews lasted approximately 60 minutes each and were mostly conducted in person at the corporate headquarters of the participating ABACUS 318 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney companies.1 The companies also shared secondary data sources with us, such as their planning manuals, process charts, global framework plans, and guidelines. We used this material to gain an understanding of the factors that characterize a TD or BU orientation in the different stages of the budgeting process, and subsequently derived items that we deemed representative for each of those stages. For the purpose of our analysis, we combined the budget negotiation stage and the approval stage of Anthony and Govindarajan’s (2007) framework, based on our observation that approval typically marks the last step in the negotiation. In the first stage of the budgeting process, that is, during the issuance of guidelines, directives and expected target levels are issued by higher-level management downwards in the hierarchy. A TD orientation in this stage is characterized by a high specificity of given directives and expected target levels, for example, by prescribing comprehensive cost caps and revenue hurdles on items that lower-level management is held accountable for. Likewise, detailed planning assumptions such as inflation or growth forecasts in specific markets serve as boundary conditions for lower-level management’s subsequent planning. A representative comment by one interviewee emphasizes this point: I am not saying that our expectations about the budget targets are carved in stone. But they are very binding and specific. Otherwise they would be of no use. Conversely, a BU orientation in this process stage is characterized by the absence of clear and specific planning assumptions and expected budget target levels. Instead, upper-level management refrains from imposing specific constraints on budget items and issues planning guidelines that inform lower-level management’s budget planning. 1 The conversation followed a semi-structured outline, and covered general questions about the budgeting process as well as specific questions about the TD–BU orientation. Table 1 OVERVIEW OF THE INTERVIEWED COMPANIES No. Industry Turnover (in million €) Employees 1 Retail 65,500 286,000 2 Telecommunications 64,600 258,000 3 Energy 47,700 70,000 4 Logistics and communication 46,200 436,000 5 Chemicals and pharmaceuticals 31,100 108,000 6 Aviation 22,200 117,000 7 Consumer goods 13,500 51,000 8 Software and IT solutions 10,600 47,000 9 Home appliances 8,400 40,000 10 Consumer goods 5,700 20,000 TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING 319 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney In the next stage of the budgeting process, that is, the development of an initial budget proposal, lower-level management creates the initial budget proposal. A TD orientation in this process stage is reflected by the strictness that higher-level management exhibits in enforcing compliance with issued directives and expected target levels when lower-level management creates the budget proposal. Thus, subordinate units’ discretion in planning their budget proposal is limited. One of our interviewees illustrated this approach: When planning the budget, there is barely deviation from the directives given earlier. That is the top-down element. Under a BU orientation, deviations from distributed directives and expected budget target levels are handled more leniently, that is, budget proposals of lower-level management that deviate from issued guidelines and directives are tolerated. In the final stage, that is, the negotiation and approval of the budget, upper- and lower-level management negotiate the final budget. A TD orientation in this stage is characterized by the amount of rigidity in the negotiation process. Procedural rigidity is implemented to influence upper-level units to make fewer concessions to lower-level units in the course of the budget negotiation. This is reflected in the process by putting upper-level management into a dominant role, for example, by setting upper-level management’s expectations of the final budget figures as a starting point in the negotiation, which establishes those as a reference point against which lower-level units have to argue if they want to enact changes to the final budget. One of our interviewees summarized the purpose of this procedure: Lower-level management needs to have good and valid reasons if they want to argue against the intended budget. Because upper management sets the initial expectations, you need to have good arguments to convince them that changes are indeed justified. Further, under a TD orientation less time is scheduled for negotiations such that lower-level management is given less opportunity to reach concessions on potential requests to change the budget. This is in keeping with the fact that lower-level units’ provision of input is less emphasized and mutual agreement on the final budget is less important. Finally, a TD orientation is characterized by a materialization of upper-level management’s opinions on certain positions in the final budget. Those opinions are typically based on global and aggregated metrics such as commodity prices or peer benchmarks compared to the operational costs and revenue data of lower-level units. A BU orientation, on the other hand, is reflected by lower-level units that actively present their draft of a final budget, an extensive negotiation period, and a final budget that reflects lower-level units’ opinions and which is based on operational data. We capture the TD or BU orientation in the corresponding three distinct stages— specificity of given directives and expected target levels, strictness of compliance enforcement of budget proposals with issued standards and rigidity of the negotiation process—with three reflective indicators each after assessing their face validity with a group of practitioners. ABACUS 320 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT We argue that the design of the process by which budgetary targets are set is an essential antecedent to managers’ perceptions of their exchange relationships: given the high importance of budgetary control arrangements and their interconnections to the performance measurement and incentive system (Hansen et al., 2003), different approaches to budgetary target setting will affect both perceptions of the social and economic relationships with the company. Specific hypotheses will now be developed. Specificity of Given Directives and Expected Target Levels In this stage, a strong TD orientation reflecting a high specificity of given directives and expected target levels is expected to be positively related to economic exchange. Economic exchange is characterized by the explicit and formalized communication of mutual obligations and rewards between the exchange parties. This is in line with a TD orientation in this stage, where superior units clearly formulate and specify their expectations towards subordinate units. Because the performance target expectations are imposed on subordinate managers without further discussion, this process structure is likely to emphasize the economic component of the relationship, highlighting the importance of job fulfillment (Shore et al., 2006). In addition, communicating highly specific target levels without consultation is more impersonal and self-interested with regard to the objectives of the company, which further strengthens the perception of an economic exchange component among the respective lower-level managers (Shore et al., 2006). Finally, a TD process emphasizes hierarchical structures inside the organization. Prior research has shown that hierarchical culture is associated with an increasing perception of economic exchange (Song et al., 2009). Under a BU orientation, no specific target levels are formulated during this process stage, leaving the managers unclear about what is expected of them. Thus, a BU orientation in this process stage exerts a negative effect on the economic exchange dimension, because a less strict approach to setting targets also obscures the clarity and specificity of the targets, and thus reduces the salience of the economic character (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005). We hypothesize: H1: A top-down (bottom-up) orientation in the issuance of guidelines increases (decreases) managers’ perceptions of economic exchange with their company. Strictness of Compliance Enforcement of Budget Proposals with Issued Standards A TD orientation in this stage reflects strict rules for enforcing compliance between the issued standards and the budget proposal that subordinate units create.A strong TD orientation is expected to decrease the perception of social exchange for several reasons. First, it puts more restrictions on subordinate managers when they plan their budget proposals. These constrained degrees of freedom in expressing one’s own opinion and the low tolerance for deviations are perceived as being disrespectful and lacking in recognition by subordinate managers who may have their own view on what the budget targets should be. This induces feelings that the company TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING 321 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney does not care about the subordinate managers’ well being, which undermines their perceptions of social exchange (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005). Second, a process structure that does not allow for a say in the creation of codified budget goals is perceived as unfair (Libby, 1999, 2001). Low levels of procedural fairness have been shown to decrease perceptions of social exchange (Masterson et al., 2000; Moorman et al., 1998).Third,a strict enforcement of compliance will likely decrease the intensity of communication between superior and subordinate units in the process, as discussions about deviations from the initial expectation level set by higher levels are discouraged. Communication, however, is a foundation of social exchange, because socio-emotional resources such as recognition and respect are predominantly conveyed via language (Molm, 2003).A lack of communication owing to the restrictions of a strict TD process thus renders the relationship with the company more impersonal, weakening perceptions of social exchange (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005). On the other hand, a strong BU orientation in the creation of budget proposals is not too constrained by expectations imposed by superior units. Thus, subordinate units can express their opinion on the budget target by deviating from the expectation communicated to them. The autonomous creation of a budget target proposal signals the company’s trust in a manager’s competence and integrity, as autonomy in the creation of budget target proposals can also be misused to incorporate slack into the budget. Thus, we hypothesize: H2: A top-down (bottom-up) orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal decreases (increases) managers’ perceptions of social exchange with their company. Rigidity of the Negotiation Process A strong TD orientation in this stage reflects high procedural rigidity, which aims to influence upper-level units to make fewer concessions to lower-level units (Fisher et al., 2000, 2006). This is expected to reduce perceptions of social exchange because this process design signals to managers of subordinate units that their provision of input is less appreciated and that the company does not emphasize the importance of reaching a mutual agreement on the final budget (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005). Moreover, less time for negotiations as is typical for a TD orientation in this stage further reduces the opportunity for constructive communication. Under a BU orientation, procedural rigidity is low, which allows lower-level units to interact with upper-level units through prolonged negotiation rounds and constructive discussions. As a consequence, mutual agreement on a final budget is more likely to occur, even though upper-level units will have to make some concessions to lower-level units in the process.Taken together, this is expected to increase perceptions of social exchange. Thus, we hypothesize: H3: A top-down (bottom-up) orientation in the negotiation of the final budget decreases (increases) managers’ perceptions of social exchange with their company. Prior literature reports a strong link between social exchange and performance dimensions, be it in- or extra-role performance (Eisenberger et al., 2001; Rhoades ABACUS 322 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney and Eisenberger, 2002; Wayne et al., 1997). Employees who are treated favourably by their organization will feel obliged to discharge and repay this positive treatment (Eisenberger et al., 2001). This results in increased organizational commitment, jobrelated affect, job involvement, and self-efficacy as well as reduced withdrawal behaviour (Rhoades and Eisenberger, 2002). Moreover, social exchange accompanies increased fairness and trust perceptions. Ultimately, these aspects that result from high social exchange lead to higher efforts in regular job duties and objectives, which is reflected in higher in-role performance (Eisenberger et al., 2001). Another consequence of social exchange is an increase in extra-role activities that go beyond the employees’ formal job description, such as an increased willingness to cooperate and an emphasis on helping co-workers (Rhoades and Eisenberger, 2002). In line with these arguments, we hypothesize: H4: Managers’ perceptions of social exchange with their company increase managerial performance. Economic exchange relationships highlight the self-interested behaviour of both exchange parties (Blau, 1964; Molm, 2003). Consequently, with a high emphasis on economic exchange a company will try to maximize its profits through contracted budget targets that are most challenging for its managers and leave the least buffer for the latter’s own consumption. Moreover, the performance expectations under economic exchange are unambiguously stated and leave little scope for discretion, thus further reducing a manager’s opportunity to build slack into the budget. For these reasons, economic exchange is expected to reduce a manager’s creation of slack. These expectations are in line with the wider literature in management control, which maintains that rigid budgetary controls decrease slack-building behaviour (Van der Stede, 2000). They are also consistent with the literature on budget negotiations. These studies show that the discretion that arises from a negotiation situation leads to a significantly higher degree of slack than an imposed budget due to concessions that superiors make in order to adhere to social norms (Fisher et al., 2000). Therefore, we expect the following relationship: H5: Managers’ perceptions of economic exchange with their company decrease the creation of budgetary slack. We did not form specific hypotheses about other potential relationships. Instead, we added control graphs to the model. Concerning the relationship between economic and social exchange, we follow arguments from prior literature (Song et al., 2009), which suggest that in a workplace setting, economic exchange provides the foundation for social exchange in the sense that a formal definition of rights and duties provide a stable economic exchange pattern which is complemented with socio-emotional involvement over time. Thus, we add a control path from economic to social exchange. We further control for performance effects that may be induced by reductions in slack. Therefore, we add a control graph from budgetary slack creation to managerial performance. Figure 1 depicts the conceptual model. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION Most prior studies have focused on the concept of budgetary participation to explain managerial responses to budgetary target setting, such as performance and slack building. However, budgetary participation focuses on interactions within the superior–subordinate dyad, but does not account for the wider budgetary process in which these interactions are embedded. The purpose of this paper was thus to conceptualize and measure the effect of the procedural aspects of budgetary target setting on managerial behaviour. Based on field data, we first developed an operational definition of a TD or BU orientation across the different stages of the budgeting process. Next, we used social exchange theory to hypothesize that a TD or BU orientation affects managerial performance and slack through managers’ perceptions of social and economic exchange. Our findings suggest that a dominance of TD budgeting characteristics enhances managers’ perceptions of an economic exchange relationship with the firm, which results in lower budgetary slack. The results further show that a dominance of BU budgeting characteristics in the development of the initial budget and the negotiation of the final budget enhances managers’ perceptions of a social exchange relationship with the firm, which results in higher (self-reported) performance. Given these findings, the paper makes the following contributions to the literature. First, we developed and empirically confirmed a TD and BU typology of the budgeting process. This typology complements the literature’s focus on supervisor– subordinate interactions by procedural characteristics in the target-setting process. Second, we demonstrated that the effects of TD and BU on managerial performance and budgetary slack are mediated by managerial perceptions of the social or economic nature of the relationship with their company. From a practical perspective our results indicate that companies need to pay attention to the implications of designing budgetary processes. In particular, tight process designs as represented by a strong TD orientation may be beneficial in some stages while being detrimental in others. In terms of theory, our findings suggest that process characteristics of target setting can fruitfully complement the traditional perspective of budgetary participation in explaining budgetary outcomes. Figure 2 VISUALIZATION OF THE STATISTICAL RESULTS Significance (two-tailed test, based on bootstrapping with 2000 replacements) ------ not significant * p < .05 ** p < .01 *** p < .001 Social exchange with the company (SocEx) Economic exchange with the company (EcEx) Budgetary slack creation (Slack) Managerial performance (ManPer) TD orientation in the issuance of guidelines TD orientation in the development of the initial budget proposal TD orientation in the negotiation of the final budget 0.313*** -0.159* -0.051 0.240** -0.243** TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP BUDGETING 333 © 2014 The Authors Abacus © 2014 Accounting Foundation, The University of Sydney As with all studies that use the survey method, this study is not immune to traditional limitations regarding internal and external validity. First, the nature of the study requires care when interpreting the statistical associations obtained from cross-sectional data as causal relationships (Van der Stede et al., 2006; Young, 1996). Survey studies generally are also susceptible to common method bias (Podsakoff et al., 2003). However, the thorough development of relationships from theory and the careful data collection process mitigate concerns about alternative explanations for the obtained results. Second, although we made a systematic attempt to develop a comprehensive operationalization of a TD/BU orientation in the respective stages of the budgeting process, we cannot rule out the possibility that certain aspects of the typology have not been accounted for. The unexpected results of the negotiation stage suggest that the measurement of the process characteristics might be refined in future studies. Having stated that, however, the quality of the measurement model and the other results of the structural model, which are in line with our theory, suggest that our operationalization captured the major elements of TD and BU orientations in the budgeting processes. Third, our findings are based on a sample of German managers, and cultural factors could be identified that may be specific to this sample and the budgetary issues we observed (Farh et al., 2007). Despite these limitations, we believe that the study provides a sound basis for a new direction on research into the organizational and behavioural effects of budgetary target setting. Future research may empirically reconfirm and refine our operationalization to improve our understanding of the theoretical properties and practical relevance of TD and BU budgeting processes. Studies may also investigate other organizational and managerial responses to a TD or BU orientation, such as organizational justice perceptions or goal commitment. Such studies could also investigate and compare whether the effect of management control system design on the formation of social and economic exchange perceptions differs across national cultures, for example in an Australian, American, or Asian context. A more structured view on contextual or organizational antecedents to TD/BU budgeting procedures is also warranted. Such a view may focus on the organization’s external environment, its strategic positioning or different degrees of information asymmetry within a company. Finally, an avenue for further research lies in the application of social exchange theory to other areas of management control, such as incentive contracts or performance evaluation.