---
title: "Case ATH"
date: 2023-12-16
type: journal
area: finance
tags: [type/journal, area/finance, status/active, topic/finance-theory]
status: active
source_file: "PERSONAL/SCHOOL/HMSM/PremasterPart2/Elective Finance/Final sources/Case-ATH.pdf"
source_type: pdf
confidence: 0.8
imported: 2026-05-14
---

HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL
9-108-092
REV: JANUARY 14, 2009
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (A): Making the
Numbers
nstructi
-
This case describes the evolution of an innovative, entrepreneurial firm in the medical technology
industry. The successes-and di(fIcult-ies---of the business are due in large part to management's attenpts to
design and use formal control systems to achieve profit and performance goals
The case is structured in five chronological sections that will be discussed in class. To prepare for the
initial discussion,please answer the questions at the end of this case.
Founding
In 1997, Dr. Charles Casper and John Frost founded ATH MicroTechnologies Inc. to develop,
manufacture, and sell a new medical imaging product. Dr. Casper (47), a radiologist, had trained at
Johns Hopkins medical school and, after a research fellowship at Harvard Medical School, joined a
private practice in Florida. Casper specialized in the use of imaging systems for the medical practice.
Over time, he had experimented with different procedures, such as ultrasounds and x-ray, until he
became interested in a new technology based on sending electronic impulses through electrodes
attached to the skin and observing how these impulses changed as they went through the body.
Together with John Frost-an engineer who specialized in digital imaging for medical applications-
Casper perfected the technology, reducing its cost and improving its resolution.
Both founders anticipated a significant market potential for their product. Relatively low cost
combined with improved image quality made it a very attractive alternative for applications where
other imaging systems were prohibitively expensive to use. With these expectations, they convinced a
group of doctors to invest in the venture. The company started with $3.6 million in paid-in capital.
In 1998, ATH MicroTechnologies received regulatory approval to market its first product-an
imaging system to work in conjunction with minimally invasive surgical procedures. Building on this
initial success and after a detailed sales and profit projection over a five year period, a deal was
struck with Alumni Capital Partners, a venture capital firm, which agreed to invest $8.7 million to
support the launch of the new product. The business plan anticipated the introduction of new
products with increased image resolution and a broader range of applications to pull the company
into profitability by the end of 2001. During this period, all the cash of the business would be invested
in product development, production tooling, and marketing.
Professor Robert Simons and Doctoral candidate Antonio Dávila prepared the original version of this case, "ATH Technologies, Inc. (A): Making
the Numbers," HBS No. 100-016, which is being replaced by this version prepared by Professor Robert Simons. Certain details have been
disguised. HBS cases are developed solely as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary
data, or illustrations of effective or ineffective management.
Copyright © 2008, 2009 President and Fellows of Harvard College. To order copies or request permission to reproduce materials, call 1-800-545-
7685, write Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA 02163, or go to www.hbsp.harvard.edu/educators . This publication may not be
digitized, photocopied, or otherwise reproduced, posted, or transmitted, without the permission of Harvard Business School.

108-092
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (A): Making the Numbers
The product was launched in December 1998 and gained a toehold in the marketplace. Additional
managers, scientists, and marketing personnel were hired. Some were given equity positions in the
company in lieu of fully competitive salaries. As expected, the investment in product development
and manufacturing processes absorbed all the cash that the business generated. In 1999, the venture
capital firm organized another round of financing, bringing other venture capital firms into the
company which invested $8.0 million. At this point, the board was comprised 60% inside directors
and 40% outsiders.
During 2000, the company improved the product and a new generation was developed. That same
year, the founders received an offer to sell the company to Scepter Pharmaceutical, Inc. (a
pseudonym), a $10 billion pharmaceutical and medical products company that wished to increase its
presence in this market segment. The offer seemed attractive to all the parties involved. The venture
capital firms would be able to cash out profitably, Scepter would add a new and successful product
to its product line, and ATH would have access to cash to finance faster growth. The business could
add more people, expand facilities, and buy new equipment to take advantage of the market
opporti.mity for its product.
ATH was acquired by Scepter in early 2001 for an initial payment of $90 million to existing
shareholders. In addition, there was an "earn-out" clause whereby Scepter would pay, on a pro rata
basis, an additional $30 million if the new products currently under development were approved by
the FDA; $35 million if an independent study proved that the ATH's technology was superior to
other existing technologies; and $120 million over a three-year period starting in December 2003 if
sales growth and earnings goals were met (Table A describes the earn-out structure). ATH's 10
equity-holding managers who chose to stay with Scepter could receive between $1.5 million and
$7.5 million as additional payout from the sale of the company.
Table A
Structure of Earn-out Payments
Sales Goals
Bonus
Earnings Goals
Bonus
2003 results
$63 million
$15 million
$8 million
$15 million
2004 results
$114 million
$20 million
$26 million
$20 million
2005 results
$165 million
$25 million
$36 million
$25 million
Table B
Financial Performance, 1997-2000
1997
1998
1999
2000
Net sales
7,290
272,582
1,295,271
4,136,258
Gross margin
(211,571)
(529,131)
(882,978)
259,842
Marketing and sales
28,968
296,874
1226,747
2,280,464
Research and development
775,941
1,320,329
2,174,553
3,295,041
Net income (loss)
(1,200,441)
(3,076,724)
(5,428,640)
(6,791,526)
Cash and short-term investments
1,000,101
5,879,451
8,122,898
1,801,023
Other current assets
128,139
645,177
1207,577
1,753,899
Net fixed assets
471,878
1,306,449
1,653,102
1,940,523
Total assets
1,865,468
8,121,039
11,414,744
5,965,154
Long-term debt
-
-
-
-
Common stock
3,649,677
12,369,788
20,379,063
20,379,063
Retained earnings
(1,976,913)
(5,053,637)
(10,482,276)
(17,273,802)
Headcount (year-end)
17
41
65
95
2

ATh MicroTechnologies, Inc. (A); Making the Numbers
108-092
Questions:
1.
Does the earn-out structure focus on the right performance goals?
(a) Should Scepter Pharmaceutical put additional controls on this ent repreneurial firm?
2.
If you were president of ATH MicroTechnologies, how would you communicate and motivate
employees to achieve profit and performance goals?
(a)
What are the appropriate performance goals for employees to focus on?
(b) How would you communicate and control events and employee actions that could put business
objectives at risk?
3.
What are the best financial measures to assess ATH MicroTechnologies' performance? Why?
3

 
9-108-093
M A Y  2 7 ,  2 0 0 8  
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Professor Robert Simons and Doctoral Candidate Antonio Dávila prepared the original version of this case, “ATH Technologies, Inc. (B),” HBS 
No. 100-017, which is being replaced by this version prepared by Professor Robert Simons. Certain details have been disguised. HBS cases are 
developed solely as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary data, or illustrations of 
effective or ineffective management. 
 
Copyright © 2008 President and Fellows of Harvard College.  To order copies or request permission to reproduce materials, call 1-800-545-7685, 
write Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA 02163, or go to www.hbsp.harvard.edu/educators. This publication may not be digitized, 
photocopied, or otherwise reproduced, posted, or transmitted, without the permission of Harvard Business School. 
R O B E R T  S I M O N S  
 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (B) 
Growth Phase:  2001-2002 
After the acquisition by Scepter in 2001, the original ATH management team (Casper, Frost, and 
the other managers hired from 1997 through 2001) decided to stay with the business. They were 
given a great deal of autonomy to manage the newly acquired business. Corporate managers at 
Scepter Pharmaceutical believed that the culture of this entrepreneurial start-up was fragile, and 
could be destroyed by forcing the use of bureaucratic planning and control techniques on this small 
company. In addition, any attempt to meddle in the decision-making authority of the founding 
managers could be construed as impeding the ability of ATH to meet its earn-out goals.  
The overriding objective of ATH senior managers—and their corporate-level counterparts at 
Scepter Pharmaceutical—was to acquire market share through new product development and 
aggressive marketing efforts. Casper, Frost, and the other senior managers made it clear how 
important it was to build ATH’s acceptance and franchise. Senior managers talked about the 
importance of market share in their frequent, informal management meetings, and pored over 
weekly shipment data to learn how they were faring in the competitive marketplace. Market share 
targets were not formally linked to the compensation of individual managers. Instead, annual 
bonuses were to be established subjectively, based on the perceived contribution of each individual to 
the success of the business. 
When the FDA approved the new generation of products in 2002, the first installment of the earn-
out was paid. However, the study of the competitiveness of the technology had shown that a new 
technology developed in Europe could challenge ATH’s position. Therefore, this portion of the earn-
out was not paid. Unfortunately, profit performance for 2001 and 2002 proved to be very 
disappointing (see Table A). Although sales revenue had increased dramatically, losses had mounted 
precipitously. The plan had been to build market share while holding—at worst—a break-even profit 
position. In fact, 2001 and 2002 had generated $37 million in losses. Part of this was due to the heavy 
investment in development costs, which were expensed directly. If senior management wanted to 
meet the requirements for the final $120 million earn-out payment, they needed to turn around the 
bottom line for 2003. 

108-093 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (B) 
2 
Table A
Financial Performance, 1997-2002 
  
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
(in thousands, except headcount) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net sales 
7 
273 
1,295 
4,136 
9,724 
17,961 
Gross margin 
(212) 
(529) 
(883) 
260 
(595) 
2,529 
Marketing and sales 
29 
297 
1,227 
2,280 
4,157 
9,743 
Research and development 
776 
1,320 
2,175 
3,295 
6,384 
10,263 
Net income (loss) 
(1,200) 
(3,077) 
(5,429) 
(6,792) 
(13,934) 
(23,481) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash and short-term investments 
1,000 
5,879 
8,123 
1,801 
(419) 
420 
Other current assets 
128 
645 
1,208 
1,754 
7,018 
8,685 
Net fixed assets 
472 
1,306 
1,653 
1,941 
5,828 
10,023 
Total assets 
1,865 
8,121 
11,415 
5,965 
12,699 
19,412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Long-term debt 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18,497 
47,506 
Common stock 
3,650 
12,370 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
Retained earnings 
(1,977) 
(5,054) 
(10,482) 
(17,274) 
(31,208) 
(54,689) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Headcount (year-end) 
17 
41 
65 
95 
221 
252 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questions: 
1. How would you evaluate the performance of ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. during the growth period? 
 
 
 
 
2.  What is the strategy of the business? 
 
 
 
3.How should performance be measured and analyzed? 
 
 
 
(a)Which additional measures would you use to implement the strategy? 
 
 
 
4.If you were president of ATH MicroTechnologies, what would you do to focus the attention and 
efforts of your employees? 
 
 
 
 

 
9-108-094
R E V :  J A N U A R Y  1 4 ,  2 0 0 9  
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Professor Robert Simons and Doctoral Candidate Antonio Dávila prepared the original version of this case, “ATH Technologies, Inc. (C),” HBS 
No. 108-094, which is being replaced by this version prepared by Professor Robert Simons. Certain details have been disguised. HBS cases are 
developed solely as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary data, or illustrations of 
effective or ineffective management. 
 
Copyright © 2008, 2009 President and Fellows of Harvard College.  To order copies or request permission to reproduce materials, call 1-800-545-
7685, write Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA 02163, or go to www.hbsp.harvard.edu/educators. This publication may not be 
digitized, photocopied, or otherwise reproduced, posted, or transmitted, without the permission of Harvard Business School. 
 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (C) 
 
Push to Profitability: 2003 
In early 2003, Charles Casper and his management team decided to launch a comprehensive 
program, “Push to Profitability.” The program was established to motivate employees to reach the 
financial goals set for 2003. The message was straightforward: The division must break even in 2003. If 
the objective was accomplished, each employee would receive a cash bonus of 20% of their salary and an all 
expenses paid trip for two to Hawaii. In addition, top management kept on the pressure for sales growth. 
Graphs were posted throughout the facilities showing the weekly level of sales, costs, and 
profitability. Each month souvenirs from Hawaii were distributed to remind people of the reward 
ahead. Employees became really focused on the financial performance of the company and they 
worked hard to increase sales and cut costs—especially discretionary costs.  
“Push to Profitability” accomplished its motivational objective. The results for 2003 outstripped 
expectations: sales quadrupled and profits were $10.6 million (Table A). 
Table A
Financial Performance, 1997-2003 
  
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
(in thousands, except headcount) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net sales 
7 
273 
1,295 
4,136 
9,724 
17,961 
73,716 
Gross margin 
(212) 
(529) 
(883) 
260 
(595) 
2,529 
44,535 
Marketing and sales 
29 
297 
1,227 
2,280 
4,157 
9,743 
16,391 
Research and development 
776 
1,320 
2,175 
3,295 
6,384 
10,263 
8,057 
Net income (loss) 
(1,200) 
(3,077) 
(5,429) 
(6,792) 
(13,934) 
(23,481) 
10,625 
Cash and short-term investments 
1,000 
5,879 
8,123 
1,801 
(419) 
420 
(1,368) 
Other current assets 
128 
645 
1,208 
1,754 
7,018 
8,685 
20,082 
Net fixed assets 
472 
1,306 
1,653 
1,941 
5,828 
10,023 
8,129 
Total assets 
1,865 
8,121 
11,415 
5,965 
12,699 
19,412 
26,960 
Long-term debt 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18,497 
47,506 
40,572 
Common stock 
3,650 
12,370 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
Retained earnings 
(1,977) 
(5,054) 
(10,482) 
(17,274) 
(31,208) 
(54,689) 
(44,064) 
Headcount (year-end) 
17 
41 
65 
95 
221 
252 
356 
 

108-094 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (C) 
2 
The trip to Hawaii in the first week of March 2004 was a resounding success. Everybody enjoyed 
the opportunity to relax and celebrate their achievement, and praised the division management for 
organizing such a celebration. 
Unfortunately, the euphoria was not to last. As product shipments increased and costs were cut, 
customers’ complaints and product returns had increased even more sharply. These problems did not 
go unnoticed. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the government regulatory agency charged 
with regulating the manufacture and distribution of medical products, paid a surprise visit to the 
division’s manufacturing plant a week after the Hawaii trip to investigate the dramatic increase in 
product defect returns experienced in the first quarter of 2004. 
On March 28, 2004, Charles Casper looked in panic at the FDA report received that morning. The 
FDA had issued a “Warning Letter” listing over 150 quality and compliance irregularities. If the 
division did not improve its processes to meet the regulatory demands, it would be barred from 
selling its core medical products. 
When Casper first received the letter, he could not believe it. The same people who had been so 
thankful and committed had put the division at the brink of disaster!! Everyone in the company was 
aware of what this letter meant—the FDA would likely shut down the entire operation! 
 
Questions: 
1. How did managers at ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. achieve their profit and performance goals 
during 2003? 
 
 
 
(a)What role did control systems play in ATH’s success and problems? 
 
 
 
(b)How could top management have avoided the actions by employees that led to the FDA 
investigation? 
 
 
 
(c)What are the possible consequences of these events on the company’s reputation? 
 
 
 
2. If you were the president of ATH, what would you do to get the business back on track? 
 
 
 
 

 
9-108-095
R E V :  J A N U A R Y  1 4 ,  2 0 0 9  
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Professor Robert Simons and Doctoral Candidate Antonio Dávila prepared the original version of this case, “ATH Technologies, Inc. (D),” HBS 
No. 100-019, which is being replaced by this version prepared by Professor Robert Simons. Certain details have been disguised. HBS cases are 
developed solely as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary data, or illustrations of 
effective or ineffective management. 
 
Copyright © 2008, 2009 President and Fellows of Harvard College.  To order copies or request permission to reproduce materials, call 1-800-545-
7685, write Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA 02163, or go to www.hbsp.harvard.edu/educators. This publication may not be 
digitized, photocopied, or otherwise reproduced, posted, or transmitted, without the permission of Harvard Business School. 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (D) 
Refocus on Process:  2004-2005 
Senior managers at ATH MicroTechnologies Inc. devoted the second quarter of 2004 to address 
each of the issues mentioned in the “Warning Letter”. In May 2004, Casper called an emergency 
Management Offsite meeting with all top ATH managers to develop action recommendations to 
avoid similar events in the future. The conclusions reached at the meeting were: 
1. Develop a Vision and Belief system where quality, customer value, and investment for the future 
are emphasized. No explicit mention of financial performance was to be included. (See Figure A). 
2. Develop a more balanced incentive system aligned with the company’s new vision and beliefs. 
John Frost was in charge of designing a balanced set of measures including product innovation, 
quality, and customer satisfaction that could be used as the basis for the bonus program for 2005. 
In addition, a task force would be set up to educate each employee in the division on the 
measures developed. 
3. Modify the bonus program for 2004 to include some non-financial measures. In particular, it was 
decided that if the earn-out goals for Income Before Taxes were met in absolute terms, employees 
would earn up to 16% of their salary; if earn-out goals for Income Before Taxes as a percentage of 
sales were achieved, there would be an additional 8% bonus; and there would be 6% bonus 
subjectively decided by the department manager of each employee (see Figure B). 

108-095 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (D) 
2 
Figure A
Vision and Beliefs of ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. 
VISION
Our ultimate accountability is to our patients, who live better lives because we continually
set the standard for diagnostic excellence with our electronic imaging products.
BELIEFS
Customer Orientation
My job is to understand and satisfy my customer’s needs.
Quality
The care of each patient depends on the quality of the products and services I deliver.
Performance
My work is important to the health of each patient, I strive to continually
improve what I do and I am recognized for how well I do it.
People
I am empowered, I communicate, and I share responsibility for my career development.
Investment in the Future
I am accountable to ensure appropriate resources are applied to meet customer needs.
Balance
I have support to balance my personal and professional life.
Alignment
Our success depends on my commitment to teamwork
and to creating and maintaining alignment.
 
By November 2004 John Frost came up with proposed measures centered on delivering value to 
the customer and the associated bonus scheme (also reproduced in Figure B below). These customer 
measures were believed to reflect the underlying processes that drove the performance of ATH 
MicroTechnologies. Employees were educated and informed about their evolution. The four 
customer measures he proposed were: 

Product Defects: number of units that do not meet our customer’s quality requirements 
divided by the total number of patients treated. 

Customer Contact Errors: number of order entry, shipping, and telephone 
responsiveness errors divided by the total number of orders taken. 

Backorders: total number of orders received for backordered product divided by total 
number of orders taken. 

New Product Delays: the number of months that new product/enhancement release 
goals are not achieved. 

ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (D) 
108-095 
3 
Figure B
Bonus Scheme for 2004 and 2005 
Bonus Program 2005
Bonus Program 2004
IBT as % of Sales -
8%
Department 
Performance - 6%
Income Before 
Taxes - 16%
Income Before 
Taxes - 14%
Department 
Performance - 6%
Customer 
Focused Quality 
Measures - 10%
Bonus Program 2005
Bonus Program 2004
IBT as % of Sales -
8%
Department 
Performance - 6%
Income Before 
Taxes - 16%
Income Before 
Taxes - 14%
Department 
Performance - 6%
Customer 
Focused Quality 
Measures - 10%
Bonus Program 2004
IBT as % of Sales -
8%
Department 
Performance - 6%
Income Before 
Taxes - 16%
Income Before 
Taxes - 14%
Department 
Performance - 6%
Customer 
Focused Quality 
Measures - 10%
 
By the end of 2004, every single issue in the FDA’s “Warning Letter” had been resolved. In 
addition, 80% of the sales and earnings goals for the 2004 “earn-out” were met and the corresponding 
payment was made.  
In 2005, the new bonus scheme was implemented. The maximum bonus for customer focused 
quality measures was 10%, representing a maximum of 2.5% for improvement in each of the four 
customer measures described above. The response of the employees was again impressive and they 
reached the maximum bonus in every single dimension except backorders (see Exhibit 1). 
In December 2005, the stockholders of ATH MicroTechnologies Inc. received their final payment 
in the earn-out. Because goals were not fully met, they received 50% of the sales-related bonus and 
70% of the earnings-related bonus. Exhibit 2 shows the financial results at December 31, 2005. 

108-095 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (D) 
4 
Exhibit 1
Performance Improvement, 2005 
























































 
Exhibit 2
Financial Performances, 1997-2005 
  
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
(in thousands, except headcount) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net sales 
7 
273 
1,295 
4,136 
9,724 
17,961 
73,716 
107,754 151,148 
Gross margin 
(212) 
(529) 
(883) 
260 
(595) 
2,529 
44,535 
68,154 
94,458 
Marketing and sales 
29 
297 
1,227 
2,280 
4,157 
9,743 
16,391 
25,529 
28,839 
Research and development 
776 
1,320 
2,175 
3,295 
6,384 
10,263 
8,057 
14,655 
15,831 
Net income (loss) 
(1,200) 
(3,077) 
(5,429) 
(6,792) (13,934) (23,481) 10,625 
24,740 
34,316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash and S.T.  investments 
1,000 
5,879 
8,123 
1,801 
(419) 
420 
(1,368) 
3,966 
9,635 
Other current assets 
128 
645 
1,208 
1,754 
7,018 
8,685 
20,082 
30,638 
39,990 
Net fixed assets 
472 
1,306 
1,653 
1,941 
5,828 
10,023 
8,129 
12,578 
10,854 
Total assets 
1,865 
8,121 
11,415 
5,965 
12,699 
19,412 
26,960 
47,366 
61,254 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Long-term debt 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18,497 
47,506 
40,572 
31,743 
- 
Common stock 
3,650 
12,370 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
23,655 
Retained earnings 
(1,977) 
(5,054) (10,482) (17,274) (31,208) (54,689) (44,064) (19,325) 
8,783 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Headcount (year-end) 
17 
41 
65 
95 
221 
252 
356 
619 
636 











ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (D) 
108-095 
5 
 
Questions: 
1. Why did senior managers introduce a vision and belief statement? 
 
 
 
 
2. Why did managers at ATH MicroTechnologies Inc. change their performance measures? 
 
 
 
 
(a)John Frost includes both process and output measures. Why? What is he trying to accomplish?  
 
 
 
 
(b)He also includes ratio and ordinal measures. What are the advantages and problems of each type? 
 
 
 
 
(c)Why did John Frost include departmental performance in the bonus scheme? 
 
 
 
 
3. What are the risks for ATH MicroTechnologies going forward? How should these risks be monitored 
and controlled? 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9-108-096
R E V :  J A N U A R Y  1 4 ,  2 0 0 9  
 
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Professor Robert Simons and Doctoral Candidate Antonio Dávila prepared the original version of this case, “ATH Technologies, Inc. (E),” HBS 
No. 100-020, which is being replaced by this version prepared by Professor Robert Simons. Certain details have been disguised. HBS cases are 
developed solely as the basis for class discussion. Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements, sources of primary data, or illustrations of 
effective or ineffective management. 
 
Copyright © 2008, 2009 President and Fellows of Harvard College.  To order copies or request permission to reproduce materials, call 1-800-545-
7685, write Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA 02163, or go to www.hbsp.harvard.edu/educators. This publication may not be 
digitized, photocopied, or otherwise reproduced, posted, or transmitted, without the permission of Harvard Business School. 
 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (E) 
New Management:  2006–2007 
During the first quarter of 2006, growth came to a halt. Products had been loaded to customers 
during the last quarter of 2005 to meet the earn-out goals. More ominously, sales in Europe were 
declining after a competitor introduced a substitute product based on laser technology to obtain 
images of the body. Some doctors considered this to be a superior technology. In eight years, ATH’s 
technology had become mature and new competitors had entered the market. The focus on growth, 
cost cutting, and profitability had blind-sided managers to new emerging technologies.  
Senior managers began to leave the division after cashing the earn-out. Dr. Casper left in March 
2006 and John Frost a month later. 
Janet Isabella, a Harvard MBA with significant financial and international experience at Scepter, 
was brought in to replace the departing executives. She soon realized that the business could not 
realistically expect to maintain sales at the prior year’s level. Accordingly, she asked each department 
head to reduce costs to 90% of their 2005 level. All incremental spending was focused on new product 
development in an attempt to regain technological leadership. 
By mid-2006 it became clear to everyone at ATH MicroTechnologies that the 14% bonus based on 
achieving income before taxes targets could not be met. The attention of employees was instead 
devoted to the customer measures (10% of bonus) and departmental objectives (6% of bonus). 
Customer satisfaction measures were renamed to focus attention on improving rather than avoiding 
mistakes.  (See Figure A) 
Figure A
Customer-Focused Quality Measures 










 

108-096 
ATH MicroTechnologies, Inc. (E) 
2 
During 2006, the business met the product quality requirements to obtain the ISO 9001 quality 
certification (2.5% bonus) and the customer service target (2.5% bonus), but completely missed the 
targets for the other two customer-focused quality measures. Most departments met their department 
goals, but product development teams missed most of the new product release goals and they 
received the lowest bonus at ATH.  
Two new products were scheduled to be introduced in January 2007. But in final tests, several 
doctors reported serious problems with both products and they were withdrawn from the market, 
leaving the division with old products in a fast changing market. Internal compliance investigations 
revealed that corners had been cut by development staff to meet product release targets. Meanwhile, 
the new technology was taking over the U.S. market. Table A shows the latest financial statements 
available. 
Table A
Financial Performance, 2000-2007 
  
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
(in thousands, except headcount) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net sales 
4,136 
9,724 
17,961 
73,716 107,754 
151,148 150,272 
90,081 
Gross margin 
260 
(595)
2,529 
44,535 
68,154 
94,458 
88,874 
52,350 
Marketing and sales 
2,280 
4,157 
9,743 
16,391 
25,529 
28,839 
27,083 
25,758 
Research and development 
3,295 
6,384 
10,263 
8,057 
14,655 
15,831 
18,111 
12,860 
Net income (loss) 
(6,792) (13,934)
(23,481)
10,625 
24,740 
34,316 
9,278 
(1,851)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash and short-term investments 
1,801 
(419)
420 
(1,368)
3,966 
9,635 108,674 
456 
Other current assets 
1,754 
7,018 
8,685 
20,082 
30,638 
39,990 
37,160 
17,846 
Net fixed assets 
1,941 
5,828 
10,023 
8,129 
12,578 
10,854 
8,928 
1,901 
Goodwill and trademarks 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 143,324 132,114 
Total assets 
5,965 
12,699 
19,412 
26,960 
47,366 
61,254 301,530 154,176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Long-term debt 
- 
18,497 
47,506 
40,572 
31,743 
- 
99,000 
(8,322)
Common stock 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
20,379 
23,655 175,493 186,185 
Retained earnings 
(17,274) (31,208)
(54,689)
(44,064)
(19,325)
8,783 
1,005 
(22,538)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Headcount (year-end) 
95 
221 
252 
356 
619 
636 
670 
289 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Questions: 
1.Why did ATH MicroTechnologies experience problems with its new products?  What role did 
measurement and control systems play in these problems? 
 
 
 
2.In hindsight, what should have been done differently?  
 
 
 
3.How would you measure and evaluate Scepter’s decision to purchase ATH MicroTechnologies in 2000? 
 
 
 

