---
title: "Min Ju"
date: 2023-12-11
type: journal
area: finance
tags: [type/journal, area/finance, status/active, topic/finance-theory]
status: active
source_file: "PERSONAL/SCHOOL/HMSM/PremasterPart2/Elective Finance/Final sources/WordFiles/Min Ju.docx"
source_type: docx
confidence: 0.8
imported: 2026-05-14
---

Asia Pac J Manag (2009) 26:701–717 DOI 10.1007/s10490-009-9148-1


Behind organizational slack and firm performance in China: The moderating roles of ownership
and competitive intensity

Min Ju • Hongxin Zhao



Published online: 30 May 2009
Ⓒ Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2009


Abstract Extensive studies of the organizational slack–performance relationship offer mixed findings in developed economies while little research attends to transition economies. Replicating and extending earlier work by Tan and Peng (2003), this study examines the relationship between organizational slack and firm performance in China and focuses on the moderating effects of firm ownership and competitive intensity. Empirical findings based on longitudinal data from 60,945 firms during 1998–2002 suggest that the impact of organizational slack on performance is stronger for private enterprises than for SOEs and foreign-invested enterprises. Furthermore, industry competitive intensity positively moderates the effect of organizational slack on performance. In a three-way interaction effect, the moderating effect of competitive intensity on the organizational slack–performance relationship is weaker in SOEs than in private enterprises and foreign invested enterprises.
Keywords Firm performance . Competitive intensity . Organizational slack . Ownership

How do different types  of organizational slack affect firm performance? What factors moderate the organizational slack–performance relationship? With exception to the work by Tan and Peng (2003) and Su, Xie, and Li (2009), most empirical research on these important questions has confined the slack–performance investigations to developed economies. However, findings documented in developed economies are ambiguous (Arnold & Quelch, 1998; Tan & Peng, 2003), and increasing evidence

We thank the Editor-in-Chief Mike W. Peng and the two anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive comments.

M. Ju (*) : H. Zhao
Boeing Institute of International Business, John Cook School of Business, Saint Louis University, 3674 Lindell Boulevard Street, St. Louis, MO 63108, USA
e-mail: mju2@slu.edu
H. Zhao
e-mail: zhaox@slu.edu


suggests that findings from developed economies may not be generalized directly to transition economies (Arnold & Quelch, 1998; London & Hart, 2004).
To address the aforementioned research gap, the present study aims to replicate and extend the study of Tan and Peng (2003) by introducing a contingency perspective in examining the moderating impacts of firm ownership type and industry competitive intensity on the organizational slack–performance relationship. Specifically, the objectives of our study are three-fold. First, we replicate the work by Tan and Peng (2003) and Su et al. (2009) using longitudinal data for 60,945 firms in China’s transition economy to test the generalizability of their findings in different types of firms from multiple industries. Based on data for Chinese state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in 1991–1992, Tan and Peng (2003) conduct two separate studies and suggest differential impacts of absorbed and unabsorbed slack on firm performance. While Tan and Peng’s (2003) work offers valuable insight, it is necessary to replicate their study as dynamic institutional and industrial changes have occurred in the Chinese economy since 1992, and replications serve “the fundamental role of protecting against the uncritical acceptance of empirical results” (Singh, Ang, & Leong, 2003: 533) and unravel real theoretical structures (Tsang & Kwan, 1999).
Second, the present study extends Tan and Peng (2003) by addressing their call for a contingency perspective on the relationship between organizational slack and performance and investigating the moderating effects of ownership type and industry competitive intensity. The first such attempt is documented in a recent study by Su at al. (2009), which investigates the moderating roles of resource munificence and environment dynamism. In the same vain, our study draws on the institutional-based view of firm behavior in transition economies (Peng, Sun, Pinkham, & Chen, 2009) to examine the moderating role of ownership types as transition economies’ dynamic and instable institutions necessitate an institutional approach in investigating the organizational diversity reflected in ownership differences (Peng, 2003; Peng, Tan, & Tong, 2004).
Specifically, we propose that the effects of slack on firm performance vary depending on the ownership types since different types of firms face different environmental constraints and competitive advantages (Shenkar & Von Glinow, 1994). Firm ownership is categorized into three groups in this study: SOEs, privately-owned enterprises (POEs), and foreign-invested enterprises (FIEs) (Peng, 1994). The groups possess heterogeneous institutional advantages and disadvantages according to different resource decision behaviors (Boisot & Child, 1996; George, 2005; Tan & Peng, 2003). Thus, when obtaining performance goals, firms of various ownerships are likely to make different resource allocation decisions and have different efficiencies of resource utilization. In addition, our study also examines the moderating role of industry competitive intensity. Dramatically intensified market competition is a significant characteristic of transition economies (Peng, 2003). The competition epitomizes the unpredicted changes or variability in the industrial environment facing the firm (Buchko, 1994; Dess & Beard, 1984) and plays a critical role in determining the firm’s strategic choice (Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997). Therefore, this study extends Tan and Peng’s (2003) work by examining whether the organizational slack–performance relationship varies with the industry competitive intensity, another variable that also has been largely neglected in the literature (Bourgeois, 1981; George, 2005; Sharfman, Wolf, Chase, & Tansik, 1988).


Third, ownership type, as an outcome of institutional arrangement, and the industry competitive intensity, as an industry factor, have each been richly yet separately studied in different fields (e.g., management, marketing, and international business). However, how various types of firms operating in different industrial competitive environments affect the efficacy of slack resources on performance remains largely underexplored. To the extent that complex institutions and the competitive industry environment in a transition economy are intertwined to affect firm behavior, firms ought to effectively allocate resources when dealing with both institutional and industrial pressures to improve performance (Peng, 2003; Peng et al., 2004; Ramaswamy, 2001). We further examine the three-way interaction effects of firm ownership, industry competitive intensity, and organizational slack. The analysis of their joint effects will directly connect the firm-level strategy choices to micro and macro branches of economic transitions and shed new light on the aforementioned research questions (Peng, Wang, & Jiang, 2008).
Overall, through replication and extension, this study seeks to contribute to the literature by testing the generalizability of Tan and Peng’s (2003) findings and by offering contingency explanations of the conditions under which slack–performance relationships alter. Further, our slack–performance study in the context of a transition economy expands the knowledge domain because transition economies have been largely ignored in the literature (Tan & Peng, 2003). By unraveling the contingencies that impact the effects of organizational slack on performance, we increase the predictive power of the organizational slack theory by providing valuable insights on how the important bi-level factors (firm ownership and competitive intensity) interact with slack resources to affect performance attainment.


Theory and hypotheses

Organizational slack is defined as “potentially utilizable resources that can be diverted or redeployed for the achievement of organizational goals” (George, 2005: 661). It is an important factor that affects firm performance (Bourgeois, 1981; Daniel, Lohrke, Fornaciari, & Turner, 2004). Slack represents potentially utilizable resources that can be redeployed to build capabilities and coalitions, and it acts as a buffer between the organization and internal change or external contingencies (Cyert & March, 1963; Sharfman et al., 1988). However, existing literature provides two countervailing opinions about the effects of organizational slack on firm perfor- mance. Organization theorists typically argue that slack offers resources for innovation and change and serves to stabilize and absorb fluctuations in external environments, thereby enhancing long-term firm performance (Cyert & March, 1963; Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978). In contrast, agency theorists question such effectiveness by claiming that slack is a source of inefficiency that inhibits risk- taking investment and innovation and provides managers with opportunities to engage in excessive diversification, empire building, and on-the-job shirking (Leibenstein, 1969).
Based on institutional theory and industrial organization theory, we join the debate by replicating and extending Tan and Peng’s (2003) work. In particular, we take a contingency approach in this study by introducing ownership type, industry


competitive intensity, and their interaction as potentially important moderators that regulate the slack–performance relation. Our specific hypotheses are delineated below.

Absorbed and unabsorbed slack

Unabsorbed (or high discretion) slack refers to firm resources that can be redeployed in a short time, such as cash, cash equivalents, raw material inventory, and marketable securities (Sharfman et al., 1988). According to the behavioral theory, firms store such resources to protect their core technology from both internal and external change. Unabsorbed slack, along with other mechanisms, provides a buffer that can absorb environmental variations and resolve conflicts among political coalitions in organizations (Nohria & Gulati, 1996). Moreover, unabsorbed slack enhances innovation because it relaxes various controls and provides sufficient funds for firms forced to be innovative. Thus, unabsorbed slack provides resource capacity and flexibility for firms to seek new investment opportunities that may lead to improved performance.
In contrast, absorbed (or low discretion) slack includes firm resources that cannot be easily recovered, such as processed material inventory or low flexibility machine capacity (Sharfman et al., 1988). Absorbed slack thus is synonymous with managerial inefficiency and resource waste rather than with buffers that enhance organizational adaptation (D’Aveni & Ravenscraft, 1994). Firms with more absorbed slack generally suffer lower firm performance growth (Singh, 1986). According to the resource-based view, because firm resources are limited, firms that can leverage their resources more efficiently should perform better (Singh, 1986). Furthermore, in transition economies, underdeveloped financial markets largely prevent the sale of assets (Khanna & Palepu, 1997). Therefore, firms with higher levels of absorbed slack cannot easily redeploy their low discretion resources to respond to environmental impacts and internal change; in turn, absorbed slack likely represents a waste of resources that harms firm performance.
Hypothesis 1a Unabsorbed organizational slack has a positive effect on firm performance.
Hypothesis 1b Absorbed organizational slack has a negative effect on firm performance.

Firm ownership

Ownership type as an important outcome of institutional environment reflects organizational diversity during dynamic and uncertain institutional transitions (Peng et al., 2004; Tan, 2002). However, most previous research only focuses on one type of firm, thus failing to capture the interactions and comparisons among different organizational forms (Peng, 2003). The diverse ownership types in China include SOEs, POEs, and FIEs (Peng, 1994), on which we focus.1 The various ownership

1 With an ambiguous ownership type, collectively-owned enterprises are nominally owned by local governments, and they often run like POEs and represent the closest organizational form to POEs (Peng et al., 2004).


types expose firms to different institutional constraints and competitive advantages (Gao, Murray, Kotabe, & Lu, 2009; Peng et al., 2004; Shenkar & Von Glinow, 1994).

SOEs Chinese SOEs tend to display relatively similar organizational structures and processes: they are large and complex and usually laden with various types of resources (Peng et al., 2004). Although the major problem in SOEs relates to inefficiency, SOEs usually have plenty of resources and often receive substantial governmental support (Li & Zhang, 2007; Peng et al., 2004; Tan, 2002). Furthermore, banks are more likely to lend to SOEs that typically already have plenty of resources available including cash, raw materials, and human resources (Child, 1994; Tan, 2002). Consequently, although decisions about resource allocations in SOEs tend to be less efficient, resulting in high levels of both unabsorbed and absorbed slack, SOEs’ performance may not be significantly affected by either absorbed or unabsorbed slack because slack resources may simply represent soft budgets.

POEs In transition economies, POEs generally have shorter life-spans and operate under tight budgets in increasingly competitive markets (Perkins, 1994). The institutional environment faced by POEs in China is quite hostile due to the lack of well-codified laws, official rules, and commercial conventions (Ahlstrom & Bruton, 2001). Without stringent legal protection, the government is apt to discriminate against POEs, subjecting them to taxation and asset seizures to raise local revenues. Ranking at the bottom of the government’s priority list, POEs typically have limited access to resources (Tan, 2002). POEs often have to compete on resourcefulness, that is, doing more with less (Peng, 2001). In this unfavorable institutional environment, POEs tend to be more effective in utilizing available resources (Perkins, 1994). Therefore, absorbed slack in POEs may cause resource constraints that weaken firms’ adaptive responses to business opportunities, thus decreasing firm flexibility and weakening firm performance (Tan, 2002). In contrast, the presence of unabsorbed slack in POEs can increase their investment budgets and help improve performance.

FIEs According to Child (1994), FIEs attempt to seek market expansion in China where they face a less familiar, more volatile and hostile environment. FIEs typically have relatively less support from the government in China. Thus, managers of FIEs tend to focus on reducing operational risks by effectively utilizing available resources and allocating most firm resources to relatively stable environments (Luo & Peng, 1999; Tan, 2002). Therefore, compared with SOEs, the positive effect of unabsorbed slack on firm performance is stronger and the negative effect of absorbed slack on firm performance is stronger for FIEs. Moreover, FIEs’ parent firms often provide established technology, which makes technology more predictable and allows FIEs to better utilize their resources. Thus, compared with POEs, the positive effect of unabsorbed slack on firm performance is weaker and the negative effect of absorbed slack on firm performance is weaker for FIEs.
Therefore, combining the preceding reasoning about these three firm types, we hypothesize:

Hypothesis 2a The positive impact of unabsorbed organizational slack on firm performance is weaker for SOEs than for POEs and FIEs.


Hypothesis 2b The negative impact of absorbed organizational slack on firm performance is weaker for SOEs than for POEs and FIEs.
Hypothesis 2c The positive impact of unabsorbed organizational slack on firm performance is stronger for POEs than for SOEs and FIEs.
Hypothesis 2d The negative impact of absorbed organizational slack on firm performance is stronger for POEs than for SOEs and FIEs.

The moderating effect of competitive intensity

Industry competitive intensity measures the effect that a firm has on other firm’s survival chances (Barnett, 1997). It is suggested that firms within an industry compete differently depending on their resources (Ang, 2008). Following this line of reasoning, it is therefore likely that the intensity of industry competition will influence the need for resources and the impact of slack resources on firm performance. In a highly competitive industry, firms mainly compete on the basis of resources and resources are extremely precious (Barnett, 1997). Therefore, firms facing greater competitive intensity may find the resources more valuable and must be efficient and selective about their choice of slack. Due to the low redeployability of absorbed slack, managers may miss investment opportunities, which are extremely important in a highly competitive environment, if they possess too much absorbed slack (March, 1994). Therefore, absorbed slack may have a stronger negative effect on firm performance in industries with greater competitive intensity. Conversely, unabsorbed slack can be easily transformed when opportunities arise and competitive moves request it. As market competition intensifies, especially as a result of the growing importance of high-technology products and service sectors (Murray, 1996), unabsorbed slack may offer firms a buffer and stimulate R&D. Thus, the positive effect of unabsorbed slack on firm performance should be stronger in more competitive industries. Accordingly, we argue that the level of industry competitive intensity moderates the relationship between organizational slack and
firm performance:
Hypothesis 3a The more intense the industry competition, the stronger the positive effect of unabsorbed organizational slack on firm performance.
Hypothesis 3b The more intense the industry competition, the stronger the negative effect of absorbed organizational slack on firm performance.


Interaction of ownership type and competitive intensity

Previous studies suggest that the influence of industry-level competition differs for various types of firms (George, 2005; Tan & Peng, 2003). We further propose that ownership type and industry competitive intensity mutually interact to moderate the slack–performance relationship. That is, industry competition may exert greater or lesser influences on the slack–performance relationship for firms of different ownership types.
Different firms face different levels of competition (Peng et al., 2004). For example, SOEs have primarily been given priority and preference by government


policies to access financial capital and resources. Thus, competitive intensity may have relatively little effect on SOEs’ allocation of resources because their soft budgets should compromise the negative effects of absorbed slack but diminish the positive effects of unabsorbed slack. Therefore, we posit that the moderating effect of competition on the slack–performance relationship is not as harsh for SOEs as for POEs and FIEs.
Furthermore, larger firms control more resources and are better able to bear and overcome competition and risks to improve performance (Cohen, 1996). SOEs in China are not only the key power brokers in the social and economic systems, but they are also generally large in size and take the monopolistic positions in key industries. In contrast, Chinese POEs are relatively smaller than SOEs and FIEs (Murray, 1996). Therefore, POEs are generally less complacent and more sensitive to competitive intensity than SOEs and FIEs, hence they are more eager to effectively and efficiently utilize both types of slack to achieve better performance. Additionally, increasing product market competition in China compels POEs to be more efficient to survive (Luo, 2007). Thus, the presence of absorbed slack, which represents managerial inefficiency, may hinder performance improvement in a highly competitive industry, whereas unabsorbed slack offers a buffer and provides POEs with improved discretion to compete in the market. Therefore, we predict that the negative moderating effect of industry competitive intensity is much stronger for POEs than for SOEs and FIEs.
Hypothesis 4a The more intense the industry competition, the weaker the positive effect of unabsorbed slack on firm performance in SOEs compared with POEs and FIEs. Hypothesis 4b The more intense the industry competition, the weaker the negative effect of absorbed slack on firm performance in SOEs compared with POEs and FIEs. Hypothesis 4c The more intense the industry competition, the stronger the positive effect of unabsorbed slack on firm performance in POEs compared with SOEs and FIEs. Hypothesis 4d The more intense the industry competition, the stronger the negative effect of absorbed slack on firm performance in POEs compared with SOEs and FIEs.


Methodology

Data

Based on the Chinese annual industrial censuses from 1998–2002, the database for this study comes from the State Statistical Bureau of China. The census data are accurate and reliable archival data (Gao et al., 2009; Tan & Peng, 2003). The database consists of all manufacturing firms, including SOEs, POEs, and FIEs, with an annual revenue of more than 5 million RMB. According to the data from China statistical yearbooks, these firms account for more than 90% of the total industrial output in China. The database provides the geographic location, industry code, firm type, scale, age, number of employees, and accounting information (e.g., assets, sales, and liability) for each firm. We use a 5-year window (1998–2002) because slack may be deployed over time and panel data generate more stable results (George, 2005).


We select SOEs, POEs, and FIEs from the database to form a balanced panel data set, resulting in 60,945 observations in multiple manufacturing industries across the country with 12,189 firms each year. The FIEs include wholly-owned subsidiaries, equity joint ventures, and contractual joint ventures. The numbers of firms of different ownership types are as follows: 40,235 SOEs, 10,925 POEs, and 9,785 FIEs. The firms are from 193 different industries based on three-digit standard industrial classification (SIC) codes. Among them, 46,928 firms are from coastal regions and 14,017 firms are from interior regions. The coastal regions consist of 11 provinces: Heilong Jiang, Hebei, Shangdong, Liaoning, Fujian, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Guangdong, Tianjin, Beijing, and Shanghai. The large, representative, national sample of firms ensures that our findings are not biased by industry or geographical effects (Heckman, 1979).

Measures

Firm performance Following Tan and Peng (2003) and Su et al. (2009), we use an accounting-based performance measure, return-on-assets (ROA), representing the annual operating revenues before interest, depreciation, and special charges, divided by the beginning-of-year total firm assets (see also Love & Nohria, 2005).

Organizational slack We follow Singh’s (1986) conceptualization because it offers the most widely used measures of slack and financial ratios and can provide more verifiable indicators of managerial behaviors (Bourgeois, 1981; Tan & Peng, 2003). Specifically, we use the ratio of firm sales expenses, general expenses, and administrative expenses to total sales to capture slack absorbed in salaries, overhead costs, and various other administrative costs (SGA ratio). To measure unabsorbed organizational slack, we use the ratio of a firm’s cash flow and marketable securities in each year to current liability (quick ratio).

Competitive intensity We use the reverse Herfindahl concentration index (one minus the Herfindahl index) to measure industry competitive intensity. The Herfindahl index measures firm size in relation to the industry and thereby indicates the amount of competition. We apply the three-digit Chinese SIC code for this measure. Thus, the sum of the squares of the market shares of each individual firm ranges from 0 (many small businesses) to 1 (a single monopolistic producer). The higher the value of the reverse Herfindahl index, the more competitive the industry (Dess & Beard, 1984).

Ownership We use dummy variables to represent POEs, SOEs, and FIEs. The categorization of the ownership is taken from the annual industrial census that contains the ownership types when firms registered with government agencies.
To isolate their possible influences on firm performance, we control firm age, size, location, debt ratio, and industry profitability. Firm age is measured by the operating year of each firm. We use the logarithm of the number of employees in each firm to represent firm size, which likely relates to organizational slack (George, 2005; Love & Nohria, 2005). For firm location, we use a dummy variable, by coding


those located in the coastal regions as 1 and 0 for those in the interior regions, to acknowledge the significant development gap. We also control debt ratio to isolate its influence on firm performance. Finally, at the industry level, we control for industry profitability, measured by the average ROA of all firms in the same industry. We also control for the three-digit SIC industry fixed effects and year fixed effects.


Results

Table 1 reports the basic statistics and the correlation matrix of the variables in this study. Before employing hierarchical multiple linear regressions, we examine the potential problems of multicollinearity and find that the values of variance inflation factor are well below the cutoff threshold of 10 (all<2), which indicates no serious multicollinearity problem in our models (Hair, Anderson, Tatham, & Black, 1998). We report the hierarchical regression results in Table 2.
Each model tests different hypotheses. Model 1 is the baseline model and is used to test Hypotheses 1a and 1b. The results show that there is a significant positive relationship between unabsorbed slack and firm performance (p <.001), and a significant negative relationship between absorbed slack and firm performance (p <.001), supporting Hypotheses 1a and 1b. Meanwhile, we also test whether there is a curvilinear relationship between slack and firm performance. The results report a significant curvilinear link (p <.001), thus supporting Tan and Peng’s (2003) findings. In Hypotheses 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d, we predict that ownership moderates the relationship between organizational slack and firm performance. We test this moderated relationship for different ownership types (SOEs, POEs, and FIEs) in Models 2 and 3. Model 2 indicates that the relationship between unabsorbed organizational slack and firm performance in SOEs is less positive compared with other ownership forms (p <.001), supporting Hypothesis 2a. Similarly, the negative effect of absorbed slack on firm performance is weaker among SOEs than among other firms (p <.001), in support of Hypothesis 2b.
In Model 3, we test the relationship of organizational slack and firm performance in POEs. Unabsorbed slack generates much better firm performance for POEs (p <.001), whereas the negative effect of absorbed slack on firm performance is stronger among POEs than other firm types (p <.001), supporting Hypotheses 2c and 2d. To illustrate the differences in the relationships for the different firm types, we depict the results by allowing absorbed and unabsorbed slack to change and by taking the mean value of other variables. As Figure 1a and b reveal, the relationship between absorbed slack and firm performance is strongest for POEs (i.e., POEs have the steepest negative slope), followed by FIEs and SOEs. Similarly, the relationship between unabsorbed slack and firm performance is strongest for POEs (i.e., POEs have the steepest positive slope), followed by FIEs and SOEs. Thus, the effects of organization slack on firm performance depend on firm ownership types.
In Hypothesis 3, we predict that organizational slack matters more for firms in more competitive industries because of the efficiency requirements. Model 4 tests Hypotheses 3a and 3b. Results show that the interaction of competition and SGA




Table 1 Descriptive statistics and correlation matrix.

***p<.001; **p<.01; *p<.05.
a Quick ratio=(Cash+marketable securities)/current liabilities.
b SGA ratio=(Selling cost+general cost+administrative cost)/total sales.

Table 2 Effects of organizational slack on firm performance (ROA), 1998–2002.

***p<.001; **p<.01; *p<.05.
Note: Year dummy and industry fixed effects are included and not shown.

ratio has a negative and significant coefficient (p<.001). Thus, Hypotheis 3b receives strong support. To illustrate the difference in the organizational slack–performance relationships under different levels of competitive intensity, we depict the absorbed slack–performance relationship in Figure 1c when we allow absorbed slack to change and take the mean value of other variables. The relationship between absorbed slack and firm performance is stronger for firms in highly competitive industries (steeper negative slope) than those in less competitive industries. To investigate if unabsorbed

Figure 1 Moderating effects of ownership type and competitive intensity
a

0.05


Moderating Effect of Ownership Type on Absorbed Slack-Performance Relationship


0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01


0



# b

0.04


0	0.4	0.8	1.2
Absorbed Slack

Moderating Effect of Ownership Type on Unabsorbed Slack-Performance Relationship


0.03

0.02

0.01


0



# c

0.08

0.06

0.04

0	0.08	0.16	0.24
Unabsorbed Slack


Moderating Effect of Industry Competitive Intensity on Absorbed Slack-Performance Relationship


0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04


-0.06


Absorbed Slack

slack has a greater effect in uncertain conditions, we test the interaction of competition and quick ratio but find no significant result to confirm Hypothesis 3a.
Finally, in Hypothesis 4, we posit a three-way interaction of ownership type and competitive intensity. In Models 5 and 6, we test this interaction. Model 5 shows that for SOEs, industry competition has a less negative effect on firm performance in the presence of absorbed slack (p <.001), which supports Hypothesis 4b. According to Model 6, compared with SOEs and FIEs, POEs are more sensitive to competition. Greater competitive intensity strengthens the negative effect of absorbed slack on POEs’ performance (p <.001), which supports Hypothesis 4d. However, the moderating effect of the interaction of ownership type and industry competitive intensity on the unabsorbed slack–performance relationship is not significant for either SOEs or POEs, indicating that there is no support for Hypotheses 4a and 4c.


Discussion

In this study, we replicate and extend the research by Tan and Peng (2003) and Su et al. (2009) by examining the organizational slack–performance relationship and the moderating effects of ownership type and industry competitive intensity in a transition economy. We summarize the major findings of Tan and Peng (2003), Su et al. (2009), and our study in Table 3. The present study makes three contributions to

Table 3 Three related studies on the relationship between organizational slack and firm performance.
Studies	Sample	Key findings



Tan and Peng (2003)	• Survey data of 57 Chinese
state-owned enterprises in the electronic industry in 1991–1992.
Archival data of 1,532 Chinese state-owned enterprises in multiple manufacturing industries in 1991–1992.

Su et al. (2009)	• Archival data of 967 firms whose
stock is traded on the Shanghai or Shenzhen stock exchanges in 2004–2005.




Current study	• Archival data of 60,945 Chinese
manufacturing firms in 1998–2002.
Unabsorbed slack resources have a positive association with firm performance.
Absorbed slack resources have a negative association with firm performance.
The impact of slack on performance is curvilinear.
Unabsorbed slack is positively related to firm performance during institutional transitions.
The positive relationship between unabsorbed slack and firm performance is moderated by resource scarcity and environmental dynamism.
Unabsorbed slack is positively related to firm performance.
Absorbed slack is negatively related to firm performance.
The organizational slack–performance relationship is moderated by ownership and industry competitive intensity.




the existing literature. First, following Su et al. (2009) as the first replication and extension of Tan and Peng (2003), the results of our study corroborate findings from two previous studies. Our study demonstrates that Tan and Peng’s (2003) slack– performance findings withstand a rigorous replication when this research is extended to a sample population with more diverse types of firms operating in multiple industries in a more recent context. Replication with extension is central to empirical generalization and knowledge development (Hubbard, Vetter, & Little, 1998). With more replications, “it is likely that the theory has hit upon some real structure or mechanism in the social world” (Tsang & Kwan, 1999: 768). Thus, the findings reported in this study not only strengthen the validity and reliability of the work by Tan and Peng (2003) and Su at al. (2009), but also adds cumulatively to our general knowledge about the slack–performance relationships.
Second, the current theoretical and empirical results are mixed and suggest positive, negative, and curvilinear relationships between organizational slack and firm performance (Daniel et al., 2004). By introducing a contingency perspective, we hope to join the debate by demonstrating that the nature of the slack– performance relationship hinges on firms’ ownership type and competitive environment. Contingency theories offer a fundamental means to advance organizational research. Incorporating moderating variables into the analysis of this two-variable relationship, we reduce the potential for misleading inferences and achieve a “more precise and specific understanding” (Rosenberg, 1968: 100).
Third, combining the institution-based firm perspective (Peng & Heath, 1996; Peng et al., 2008, 2009) and the industrial organization theory, we further explore the joint interaction effect of firm ownership and industry competitive intensity both resulting from complex institutional environments as these two perspectives complement each other to collectively shed new light on the fundamental questions of efficiency and performance in transition economies (Peng et al., 2008). Institutions are important in understanding firm structure and behavior (Peng, 2003; Scott, 1995), especially in transition economies that are experiencing massive institutional changes (Peng, 2003; Peng et al., 2008, 2009). Thus, through examining the simultaneous moderating effects of ownership and competitive intensity, we gain more insights to the dynamism among these institutionally-induced variables and slack and performance linkages.

Managerial implications

This study provides profound practical implications for firms and investors. Rather than regarding organizational slack either as an inefficient resource or praising it as a good performance predictor, managers must not only be aware of the differential effects of absorbed and unabsorbed slack, but must also pay attention to the impact of factors that moderate the effects of slack on performance. Investors who intend to invest in SOEs in transition economies should not hesitate simply due to the SOEs’ high level of slack because the negative effects of absorbed slack in SOEs is not as serious as it would be in other types of firms. On the other hand, managers of POEs should take organizational slack seriously. Furthermore, managers employed by firms with different ownership types should be aware of different impacts of industry competitive intensity. Specifically, managers of POEs should be more cautious about industry competition because its effect is much stronger than it would be for other firms.

Limitations and future research

Our contingency perspective represents an exploratory step for specifying the conditions that affect the nature of the organizational slack–performance relation- ship. However, it has several limitations that future research should address. First, we rely on archival data in our analysis without first-hand information from managers about their opinions of different types of slack. Thus, our inferences are limited, lacking the experiential knowledge that frontline managers might provide. Additionally, the archival data do not allow us to clearly classify firm ownership based on percentages. This may limit our ability to have more robust tests and more refined understanding of various types of ownership effects from management control perspectives. Researchers should employ survey methods or combine survey and archival methods to achieve the power of two independent studies (Tan & Peng, 2003). Second, although China represents the largest transition economy in terms of GDP (Hoskisson, Eden, Lau, & Wright, 2000), future research should explore the generalizability of our findings by extending the study scope to examine whether they apply to other transition economies with similar or different institutional environments. Given the lack of literature focused on transition economies and their growing importance in today’s world order (Arnold & Quelch, 1998), further studies in this direction would prove to be constructive for theory advancement. Third, factors other than ownership types and industry competitive intensity may contribute to organizational slack–performance relationships. Additional research should examine related organizational activities, such as learning, adaptation, and capability, in various contexts to advance our knowledge in this area. Fourth, although the use of longitudinal data in this study may capture the dynamic picture of Chinese institutional transitions, it is more insightful to take a staged perspective to examine the interaction and coevolution between firm strategy and institutional environment (Peng, 2003; Tan & Tan, 2005). Given the instability associated with the institutional transitions, firms may shift strategies and undertake organizational transformation as institutions evolve and change from relationship-based to a more rule-based environment (Peng, 2003). Thus, future research may consider empirically exploring the organizational slack–performance relationship together with Peng’s (2003) recent conceptualization of the time-based evolutionary perspective of institutions.


Conclusion

Investigating ownership type and industry competitive intensity as two important moderators generates several new insights on the organizational slack–performance relationship. Our findings suggest that the negative influence of absorbed slack may not be as harsh for SOEs as it is for POEs and FIEs. In addition, increased unabsorbed slack cannot continually benefit SOEs’ performance. The negative influence of absorbed resources also is stronger for POEs than for other types of firms, but POEs can continue to improve their performance with more unabsorbed slack. The negative effect of absorbed slack on firm performance becomes stronger when industry competitive intensity is higher. Further, the negative moderating effect of competitive intensity is weaker for SOEs but gets stronger for POEs. Thus, this

study provides strong evidence that firm ownership and competitive intensity, both separately and simultaneously, shape slack–performance relationships in China.


References

Ahlstrom, D., & Bruton, G. D. 2001. Learning from successful local POEs in China: Establishing legitimacy. Academy of Management Executive, 15(4): 72–82.
Ang, S. H. 2008. Competitive intensity and collaboration: Impact on firm growth across technological environments. Strategic Management Journal, 29(10): 1057–1075.
Arnold, D. J., & Quelch, J. A. 1998. New strategies in emerging markets. Sloan Management Review, 40 (1): 7–20.
Barnett, W. P. 1997. The dynamics of competitive intensity. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(1): 128–160.
Boisot, M., & Child, J. 1996. From fiefs to clans and network capitalism: Explaining China’s merging economic order. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41(4): 600–628.
Bourgeois, L. J. 1981. On the measurement of organizational slack. Academy of Management Review, 6 (1): 29–39.
Buchko, A. 1994. Conceptualization and measurement of environmental uncertainty: An assessment of the Miles and Snow perceived environmental uncertainty scale. Academy of Management Journal, 37(2): 410–415.
Child, J. 1994. Management in China during the age of reform. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, W. W. 1996. Firm size and the nature of innovation within industries: The case of process and product R&D. Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(2): 232–243.
Cyert, R., & March, J. 1963. A behavioral theory of the firm. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Daniel, F., Lohrke, F., Fornaciari, C., & Turner, R. A. 2004. Slack resources and firm performance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Business Research, 57(6): 565–574.
D’Aveni, R., & Ravenscraft, D. 1994. Economics of integration versus bureaucracy costs: Does vertical integration improve performance?. Academy of Management Journal, 37(5): 1167–1206.
Dess, G. G., & Beard, D. W. 1984. Dimensions of organizational task environments. Administrative Science Quarterly, 29(1): 52–63.
Gao, G. Y., Murray, J. Y., Kotabe, M., & Lu, J. 2009. A “strategy tripod” perspective on export behaviors: Evidence from domestic and foreign firms based in an emerging economy. Journal of International Business Studies, forthcoming.
George, G. 2005. Slack resources and the performance of privately held firms. Academy of Management Journal, 48(4): 661–676.
Hair, J. F., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. 1998. Multivariate data analysis. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Heckman, J. J. 1979. Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica, 47(1): 153–161. Hoskisson, R. E., Eden, L., Lau, C., & Wright, M. 2000. Strategy in emerging economies. Academy of
Management Journal, 43(3): 249–267.
Hubbard, R., Vetter, D. E., & Little, E. L. 1998. Replication in strategic management: Scientific testing for validity, generalizability, and usefulness. Strategic Management Journal, 19(3): 243–254.
Khanna, T., & Palepu, K. 1997. Why focused strategies may be wrong for emerging markets. Harvard Business Review, 75(4): 41–51.
Leibenstein, H. 1969. Organizational or frictional equilibria X-efficiency and the rate of innovation.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 83(4): 600–623.
Li, H., & Zhang, Y. 2007. The role of managers’ political networking and functional experience in new venture performance: Evidence from China’s transition economy. Strategic Management Journal, 28(8): 791–804.
London, T., & Hart, S. L. 2004. Reinventing strategies for emerging markets: Beyond the transnational model. Journal of International Business Studies, 35(5): 350–370.
Love, G. E., & Nohria, N. 2005. Reducing slack: The performance consequences of downsizing by large industrial firms, 1977–93. Strategic Management Journal, 26(12): 1087–1108.
Luo, Y. 2007. Coopetition perspective of global competition. Journal of World Business, 42(2): 129–144.
Luo, Y., & Peng, M. W. 1999. Learning to compete in a transitional economy: Experience, environment and performance. Journal of International Business Studies, 30(2): 269–296.
March,    J.    1994.    A    primer    on     decision-making.     New     York:     The     Free     Press. Murray, W. 1996. The Chinese family business enterprise. California Management Review, 38(4): 141–155.


Nohria, N., & Gulati, R. 1996. Is slack good or bad for innovation?. Academy of Management Journal, 39 (5): 1245–1264.
Peng, M. W. 1994. Organizational changes in planned economies in transition: An eclectic model.
Advances in International Comparative Management, 9: 223–251.
Peng, M. W. 2001. How entrepreneurs create wealth in transition economies. Academy of Management Executive, 15(1): 95–108.
Peng, M. W. 2003. Institutional transitions and strategic choices. Academy of Management Review, 28(2): 275–296.
Peng, M. W., & Heath, P. S. 1996. The growth of the firm in planned economies in transition: Institutions, organizations, and strategic choice. Academy of Management Review, 21(2): 492–528.
Peng, M. W., Tan, J., & Tong, T. W. 2004. Ownership types and strategic groups in an emerging economy.
Journal of Management Studies, 41(7): 1105–1129.
Peng, M. W., Wang, D. Y. L., & Jiang, Y. 2008. An institution-based view of international business strategy: A focus on emerging economies. Journal of International Business Studies, 39(5): 920–936.
Peng, M. W., Sun, S. L., Pinkham, B., & Chen, H. 2009. The institution-based view as a third leg for a strategy tripod. Academy of Management Perspectives, 23(2) forthcoming.
Perkins, D. 1994. Completing China's move to the market. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(2): 23–46. Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. 1978. The external control of organizations. New York: Harper & Row.
Ramaswamy, K. 2001. Organizational ownership, competitive intensity, and firm performance: An empirical study of the Indian manufacturing sector. Strategic Management Journal, 22(10): 989–998.
Rosenberg, M. 1968. The logic of survey analysis. New York: Basic Books. Scott, W. R. 1995. Institutions and organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Sharfman, M., Wolf, G., Chase, R., & Tansik, D. 1988. Antecedents of organizational slack. Academy of Management Review, 13(4): 601–614.
Shenkar, O., & Von Glinow, M. A. 1994. Paradoxes of organizational theory and research: Using the case of China to illustrate national contingency. Management Science, 40(1): 56–71.
Singh, J. 1986. Performance slack and risk taking in organizational decision making. Academy of Management Journal, 29(3): 562–585.
Singh, K., Ang, S. H., & Leong, S. M. 2003. Increasing replication for knowledge accumulation in strategy research. Journal of Management, 29(4): 533–549.
Su, Z., Xie, E., & Li, Y. 2009. Organizational slack and firm performance during institutional transitions.
Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 26: 75–91.
Tan, J. 2002. Impact of ownership type on environment, strategy, and performance: Evidence from China.
Journal of Management Studies, 39(3): 333–354.
Tan, J., & Peng, M. W. 2003. Organizational slack and firm performance during economic transitions: Two studies from an emerging economy. Strategic Management Journal, 24(13): 1249–1263.
Tan, J., & Tan, D. 2005. Environment–strategy co-evolution and co-alignment: A staged model of Chinese SOEs under transition. Strategic Management Journal, 26(2): 141–157.
Teece, D., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. 1997. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic Management Journal, 18(7): 509–533.
Tsang, E., & Kwan, K. 1999. Replication and theory development in organizational science: A critical realist perspective. Academy of Management Review, 24(4): 759–780.

Min Ju is a doctoral student at John Cook School of Business, Saint Louis University. Her research interests include international business strategy, marketing channel relationships, and strategic marketing in China.

Hongxin Zhao (PhD, George Washington University) is David Orthwien Professor of international business at Boeing Institute of International Business, John Cook School of Business, Saint Louis University. His research areas are in international business strategy, knowledge sharing, and social capital. His publications appear in journals including Journal of International Business Studies, Journal of International Marketing, Management International Review, International Marketing Review, among others. Dr. Zhao taught previously at National University of Singapore and was an international program coordinator at the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Trade (now the Ministry of Commerce) and the Ministry of Science and Technology.

