---
title: "AS2023 Tutorial2.3"
date: 2023-11-20
source_file: "PERSONAL\SCHOOL\HMSM\PremasterPart2\Academic Writing\AS2023_Tutorial2.3.docx"
source_type: docx
tags: [personal]
area: Areas
status: active
confidence: 0.8
imported: 2026-05-14
---

Tutorial 2.3: Writing Critically & Extending the Research

Writing critically
“Writing critically involves analysing and evaluating your own and others’ work and presenting a point of view” (Gillett, Hammond, & Martala, 2009, p. 136).

Analysing, evaluating, and, when called for, formulating an opinion are an essential aspect of academic writing. Considering and discussing involves giving both positive and negative aspects of each issue.  On the basis of the discussion, an argument can then be presented to persuade a reader to a point of view or opinion.





In order to write critically, you first have to make sure that your work clearly spells out the link between your arguments and the evidence being used to support them. You cannot imply a link or assume the reader will accept your argument unless you present a compelling case based on evidence. You must always support your claims. This is why references are so important. It is also important to distinguish between your point of view and your evidence.
Second, consider the contribution that your study makes to the research topic. This will help you to draw conclusions about the implications or significance of your work. Third, think about the way your report is structured. Last, it does not matter how ground-breaking your findings might be, if your work is not formatted and structured properly it will be of little value.

TASK 1: Making a claim – showing supporting ideas
Critical writing involves giving explanations for why things happen. Read the following text and identify the claim and supporting evidence.







Hedging
When stating a claim you should use caution and avoid being overly confident. HEDGING LANGUAGE (i.e.: it seems, it appears as though, most research supports the claim that, etc....) is used to qualify your view or show different degrees of certainty.

TASK 2: Hedging
Your claim will normally be a general declaration, but academic writing demands that it is often cautiously stated (hedging). Look at the following text and underline examples of hedging.






Evaluating points of view
Academic study frequently requires students to cautiously put forward their own point of view.  It also requires them to evaluate and comment on other’s ideas.  When evaluating a point of view or conclusion, you need to:
present the point of view
comment on it positively or negatively
The following table provides language that you can use to show different points of view from your sources.

TASK 3: Point of View  The following table contains texts that present other people’s points of view.  Underline the language used to show the different perspectives.








The following tables contain language to show positive or negative evaluation.

Positive evaluation









Negative Evaluation




TASK 4: Identify evaluative phrases








TASK 5: Reverse Outline or Mind Map Capstone Articles – prepare this in advance on your own!
In the next week, you will begin writing the body of the Capstone assignment and need to integrate the themes from Articles 1-4.  Use the space below to plan how you can organize your paper based on common themes presented from your sources. Alternatively, use the mind map file (see tutorial folder) to create a more visual display of these ideas.

Skim through each of the Capstone articles and note the topics discussed in the body of each paper.  Some may be clearly marked with headings, others require you to skim for key words/concepts.  Make an outline of the topics for each article below. Then, look at overlapping themes that reoccur in your sources. How can you integrate your discussion of these topics in the body of your Capstone paper?






EXTENDING THE RESEARCH

You have now read and analyzed the core articles for the Capstone assignment.  Go back now to your elective page and re-read your project description for the Capstone paper.  What is the assigned topic? How can you extend the research in your own paper and develop a unique research question?

A good starting point for forming your own research question is to ask:

What questions do you have after reading these texts?
What gaps remain, problems that are unsolved or addressed by these sources?
Are there specific areas you can apply this concept to from your own background or interest area?
A good research question has a complicated answer (not a yes or no answer).  You should be able to also explain the significance of your question:

Topic: I am researching the topic of.....

Question: because I want to find out....
Significance/practical application: so that I can help others understand....


FINDING GOOD SOURCES

Give yourself time to search for good, academic quality articles (published in peer-reviewed journals) that answer your question.  Start by looking for specific keywords.  Skim the abstract, introduction and conclusion of your articles to decide if they fit your research question.

Start with a question in mind, and not already an answer – your sources may bring new information that makes you think differently about your topic.

Use ZUYD bibliotheek e-bronnen to access free, academic articles in one of their many databases, such as Wiley Online Library:  https://bibliotheek.zuyd.nl/zoeken?doSearch=1&q=Wiley+Online+Library.

Review APA 7th edition Guide for formatting of sources in-text and final references page (on Moodle) Microsoft Word - AS2021_APA7guide.docx (zuyd.nl)

Review guidelines on Plagiarism: What Is Plagiarism? | Definition & Examples (scribbr.com)



Task 6: What is acceptable use of AI in academic writing? (to be completed during class)

Students are increasingly using AI tools to help with researching and writing academic papers. What is allowed, and what is prohibited?  During class, we will take time to review materials from Zuyd (in Dutch only) and discuss key points.

Link to online activity:
ChatGPT en literatuuronderzoek (libwizard.com)

Review Zuyd Guidelines on use of AI in academic writing (in Dutch): handreiking_ai_studenten.pdf (zuyd.nl)

AI can be used for....
Brainstorming a good research question or key words
Finding out what is already known about a topic, which sources to look for
Getting some initial ideas about my area of research
Using tools like Grammarly.com to check grammar and spelling errors

AI should NOT be used for...
Paraphrasing or writing sentences for me that I later copy/paste into my paper
Note: All final papers will be checked for use of AI

PLANNING THE STRUCTURE

Once you have identified the major themes of your four key sources, you can begin to plan the body of the Capstone. You want to organize the writing in the body based on the topic (main idea – supporting idea) and integrate your use of sources when possible.

Preparing an outline is an important pre-writing step to ensure you have a clear idea what you want to write BEFORE you begin writing.  This will improve the organization of your writing as well.  See the tutorial folder for more examples of outline formats.

For week 2.3 writing assignment, you will prepare a Research Proposal about your focus topic based on 2 additional sources, as well as an Outline of the structure of the body (using sources 1-6) – see format provided on Moodle for details!











TASK 7:  Small Group Feedback on Research Proposals (to be completed during class)
Share your ideas in a small group and provide each other feedback on the following -

Does your continued research topic fit with the Capstone assignment?
Does it build upon what is already known and add something new?
What research gap does this research fill?
Is your research question worded clearly?
Not a yes/no answer
Not an obvious answer
Names specific variables that will give your paper direction
Are your 2 sources both academic journal articles published in the last 10 years?
Make sure you are not using the same authors for multiple sources since you are only looking at 6-8 articles
Do my sources include the same KEY WORDS in their title as I am using in my research question? (If not, they might not be specific enough to help you write this paper)

TASK 8:  Peer/Self Review of the Outline of your paper (to be completed during/after class with a partner)

Exchange your writing with a partner and provide feedback on the structure of the body of the paper.
Are there clear chapter headings?
Is there a logical flow of topics?
Funnel – broad to specific, ending with focus topic
Integrated – By topic, with additional sources integrated into main themes
Are sources compared and integrated when possible? Or does each chapter read like a summary of one source (if so, you need to improve this!)
Are references in APA format?
Check in text APA
Indirect sources: (Author, year, as cited in Author you read, Year)
“Direct quotations” (Author, year, p. #)
3+ names Authors: (Author et al., Year)
Multiple sources for an idea, list alphabetically: (Author, year; Author, year; Author, year)