---
title: "AS2020 Tutorial 2.1"
date: 2023-11-11
source_file: "PERSONAL\SCHOOL\HMSM\PremasterPart2\Academic Writing\AS2020_Tutorial 2.1.docx"
source_type: docx
tags: [personal]
area: Areas
status: active
confidence: 0.8
imported: 2026-05-14
---

This block, Academic Skills class is organized to support students in writing a Capstone paper based on their Elective topic.  You will make weekly progress towards this independent assignment, with the support of tutorial materials, peer review and limited Tutor feedback.  The Capstone paper is a minimum 4,500 words and is a requirement of Maastricht University to prepare for a Master’s Program.

Capstone assignment

Through writing a capstone, students will learn to address a scientific topic by critically reviewing academic literature, i.e. by pointing out the strengths as well as the weaknesses of the literature. A good review goes beyond a pure summary of the articles but also provides an integrative assessment of them. In addition, students should learn how they can relate their own ideas into a current academic discussion. Thus, students need to develop the given topic further by formulating an own specific problem statement, which advances the current knowledge. The four provided articles should be taken as point of departure, which reflects how those authors think about the topic. Thus the four provided articles are the base of your assignment. To advance the topic further, i.e. to manifest your own related specific problem statement, you need to search 2 additional literature articles. You need to relate these articles to the topic and especially to your specific problem statement. The assignment allows students to learn (1) how they can use their creativity to focus or reformulate the scientific problem and (2) how they can embed own idea into in current literature. Competences: - critical reflective and creative thinking - academic writing abilities - summarizing and synthesizing of literature - self-reliant working
Total of 6 articles (4 assigned, 2+ selected by student)
Total of 4,500-5,000 words
Elective topics: see MOODLE Elective pages for more details!
Look at grading criteria of the Capstone Paper (on Moodle)

Task 1: WATCH VIDEO ON WRITING A THESIS (20 MINUTES): https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=3&v=vHHtfO-Bu1M

Task 1 Response to video:

Something new I learned from this presentation….

Well-Presented Writing:

Importance of good sentences, grammar, and formal academic tone.
Emphasis on using short, simple words and phrases.
Guidelines for active voice usage and avoiding fancy language.
Style and Structure Expectations:

Focus on Unity, Coherence, and Development in the thesis.
Logical arrangement of ideas from research question to conclusions.
Consistent elements such as heading style, font, and layout.
Verb Tenses and Clear Argument:

Explanation of present, past, and future tenses in academic writing.
Consistent usage of tenses throughout the thesis for clarity.
Ensuring a clear and logical flow of ideas to maintain a cohesive argument.
Proving Knowledge of Relevant Literature:

Importance of an up-to-date literature review.
Inclusion of key debates in the field of study.
Demonstrating awareness of other researchers' positions in these debates.
Helpful Writing Tips:

Use of outlines to organize thoughts and structure.
Regular communication with supervisors for guidance.
Setting goals and deadlines to manage the writing process effectively.
Importance of careful editing, adherence to referencing styles, and maintaining a clear argument.
Encouragement for perseverance and dedication in the thesis writing process.

A well-organized, clear, and thoroughly researched thesis, combined with effective writing strategies, is essential for academic success.

Something I want to know more about in Academic Skills this block….


I would like to learn more about how to structure your thesis and how to ensure there is full coherence inside the paper.










WHAT IS SPECIAL ABOUT ACADEMIC ENGLISH?

Everyday words and academic uses
Many words in academic English are the same as everyday vocabulary, but they may be used with a slightly different meaning.
Example: 	Standards of discipline in school have declined.
Nanotechnology is a relatively new discipline. (area of study)
Example 2: 	The research underlines the importance of international trade

Vocabulary and academic style
For more practice with academic vocabulary, see:
In writing, you can improve the academic tone of your writing by using more formal expressions:



ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FOR BUILDING YOUR ACADEMIC VOCABULARY
Improving your vocabulary requires time and practice, have a look at some of these online resources:

http://www.monash.edu.au/lls/llonline/writing/general/academic/3.1.xml

http://www.englishvocabularyexercises.com/academic-word-list/

http://www.victoria.ac.nz/lals/resources/academicwordlist/publications/awlsublists1.pdf


Task 2: Academic Vocabulary

2A: Each of the following words can be used in both everyday language and academic language, often with different meanings. Match the correct word to the sentence that best fits.




2B	Use more formal alternatives to the words in bold. Make any necessary grammatical changes.

The book is mainly concerned with the problem of policing the internet.
Almost every school in the country has reported problems with the new system.
Basically, we believe we have demonstrated a significant link between the two events.
The study is a really good example of the way sociologists collect their data.
We tried to find a new way of understanding the data.

Answers 2B
The book primarily focuses on the issue of regulating the internet.
Virtually every school in the country has documented issues with the new system.
Fundamentally, we assert that we have illustrated a noteworthy connection between the two events.
The study is a noteworthy illustration of how sociologists gather their data.
We strove to discover a novel approach to comprehending the data.


Task 3: Paraphrasing and vocabulary practise




Pinpoints
Proves
Claims
Asserts
Advances
Description (Contention = heated disagreement."the captured territory was the main area of contention between the two countries")
Cast doubt










WRITING A GOOD SUMMARY: a review (Clines & Cobb, 2013, pp. 27-28)






Task 4 Academic Reading Strategies
Consider the following questions on your own before class

Think back to the last session of Academic Skills. How much of an issue was time management for you? What adjustments did you have to make to your scheduling of time?

Think back to the first academic article you read during the last session and the last article you read? What was different about how you approached them? How did your reading change? What strategies helped you to improve your reading comprehension?




Task 5: (to be done during class) Recognizing the relationship between academic reading and academic writing is another important step in becoming a more effective reader.  It is important to understand your assignment (what are you looking for?) before you begin reading and taking notes.  On your own, read the Capstone assignment description on Moodle Elective page.

In Class: REVIEW NOTE TAKING FORMAT FOR WEEK 2.1 WRITING ASSIGNMENT

ACTIVE READING STRATEGIES – Whole Group Using Elective Article 1

Activate prior knowledge: Read only title and abstract
What do I already know about this topic?

Preview article: Skim through document, read only headings, bold text
What do I expect to find out/what do I want to learn?

Select important content to focus on:
Read Introduction & Conclusion/Discussion first to understand topic
Then read Body, chapter by chapter, summarizing as you go!
Scan – Chapter transitions, topic sentences of each paragraph – what is the main idea?
Which chapters have the key information for my research?
Which chapters can I skip or skim quickly?

Active reading
Underline/circle/highlight key words
Summarize main ideas as you read in your own words
As you are reading ask a question, make notes in margins
Make connections between topics
Draw a picture/diagram/make a visual to show connections between ideas/themes

After reading
Reflect: What did I learn?
What questions do I still have about this topic?
Any critical reflections on the evidence used or the content of the article?
DON’T FORGET TO PREPARE THE ANALYSIS QUESTIONS AT THE END OF YOUR NOTES, WE WILL USE THIS IN CLASS WEEK 2.2

Task 6: Week 2.1 writing assignment (due by end of week)

Use these academic reading strategies to finish reading Capstone Article 1 & 2 on your own.  Use the assigned format on Moodle to write a Summary/outline of the most important ideas, in note taking format (not complete sentences yet).  Make sure you include sources for ideas (Author/indirect sources, year, page #) so you can include this in your final paper.  Summaries should be at least 800 words per article. Submit writing to Moodle by Friday.

Summary = MAIN ideas, paraphrased in your own words or show quotation marks with page number!





Task 7: Peer Review (to be done after class meeting time with assigned group members)

Exchange your writing via email with one person from your assigned work groups.

Give each other feedback on the following points:

Content: Did I include headings from the article?
Did I summarize main ideas in my own words?
Notes do not need to be in complete sentences

APA format in-text:
Did I show sources for ideas (Author, Year, p.#) or indirect sources (Author, Year, as cited in Author, Year, p. #)
If I copy/pasted text, did I show “direct quotations”?

Analysis criteria: Compare your assessment of the article










