**Individual responsibility**

What is individual responsibility? To answer this question, we will first need to look at the two words individually. The oxford dictionary defines responsibility as this: *“a duty to deal with or take care of someone or something so that it is your fault if something goes wrong”*. So individual responsibility then is when you take care of someone or something and can be held accountable for this when it goes wrong. 

For me personally, I think this value means the following: taking the full blame when you don’t deliver on a promise and being reliable not only within your personal life but also professionally and thus as a student. This value also lies close to me to a value that is near and dear to my heart which is determination. This is for me the ability to pull through and keep going. This is what will help you to put first things first. Break loose from your old bad habits. I believe that to accomplish personal responsibility you will first need determination because that is what will make sure that you will keep your promises.

The reason I can relate to this value is that I know important this value is from my personal experience. When I used to work as a bartender, I first needed to make sure that I had done with my mise-en-place before the guests came for their drinks, and then I could take some time to relax and have a laugh with my colleagues and have a bite to eat.

I believe this value is important within hospitality because without you taking individual responsibility a team won’t function. This is because when you are working in hospitality you have a lot of tasks to do. Take being a waiter for example. When you are a waiter you need to, first of all, know the menu inside out, all the allergies, the specials, and all the drinks that can be ordered. This is all preparation before you even start your working day. If you don’t take the responsibility needed in this area, so learning the dishes and the allergies, etc. you won’t be able to work and do your job accordingly and thus your team won’t be able to reach their full potential. The guest will also not be satisfied because his or her needs aren’t met and actually because you didn’t take your responsibility can’t be met. This is one of the reasons why it is important to take individual responsibility and why it is important within hospitality. 

Personally, I think when I am on the work floor I most of the time show this value. An example of this was around one year ago. When I was working behind the bar at Villa Orloff, the bar where I worked in Utrecht. It was a really busy night and we, if I am going, to be honest, were understaffed. I was working behind the bar and the tickets were flying out almost faster than I could make them. To sketch the situation in one hour we made around 1000 euros in revenue from the bar alone and I was the only one working behind the bar. This meant that I and most of my colleagues were a bit stressed, to say the least. When a young couple came sitting at the bar, I told them I would be right with them and still 10 minutes later I was not. After 10 minutes I came to them and asked them what I could help them with and apologized for making them wait. After I got them their drinks and they ordered their food, a pizza Picante and the MRIJ[^1] burger. I went on and put it in the system. After 30 minutes they asked when their food would arrive and I looked in the system and saw that it was not put through correctly. Here I took full personal responsibility and told them that I didn’t put their food in the system correctly. After I apologized for my mistake and I asked them if I could offer them a drink off of the house. They kindly accepted this and afterward when they got their food and they paid their bill they gave a good tip and thanked me for solving the problem that I created accordingly. 

I believe that this situation goes to show that taking responsibility for your actions is very important because if I would have written it off as someone else’s mistake it would have negatively influenced the team and that would not be good for anybody. It also goes to show that other people appreciate it when you take responsibility.

To go short, personal responsibility is essential because it makes sure that you can be held accountable for your actions. This makes sure that when you make a mistake you own up to it and no one else needs to tell you what you have to do because you already know it. This makes sure that your manager doesn’t have to devote a lot of energy to tell you what to do because he knows you already know what to do and can focus on the team.

[^1]: MRIJ – Maas Rijn IJssel is the area where the cow is raised. MRIJ is an area in the Netherlands and Germany
