I have been working at the W, in Fort Lauderdale, for four months. Something strange that I have learned while working and living here is that people don't care about getting a promotion within the Food and Beverage department. During my time here I have, so far, found three explanations. They are related to pay, hours, and long-term versus short-term. In the following paragraphs, I will dive into the explanation.

Firstly, pay because Americans love to talk about how much they make. When comparing the salaries of an entry-level manager at the W to what a pool attendant or server makes a reason why not to go into management becomes clear. A server at the W makes \$7 per hour and a pool attendant makes \$13 per hour. When you go into management you only make \$15 per hour with a ceiling of \$33 per hour.

But this is only hourly on top of this the pool attendant or server makes gratuity. For a server, this ranges anywhere from \$100 to around \$500 per day. As a pool attendant, you make around \$50 - \$200 per day. This means that your hourly as a server is around \$19,50 - \$69,50 per hour and as a pool attendant it is between \$19,25 - \$38,00. Looking at these numbers you quickly realize that managers (especially lower/newer) in most instances make less than the floor staff actually makes and this is even disregarding the additional workload.

Talking about the additional workload as a manager it is not uncommon to work 50 to 60-hour work weeks due to the tremendous number of projects you need to undertake. Comparing this to a server who once he or she goes home doesn't need to worry about work at all, and can just relax sometimes as a manager you are still working when you come home to finish a presentation.

As a manager, you have the potential to grow into a better-paying position which is why a lot of people choose to become one however that is only looking long-term and if you can make it, and that is a big if. Life here in Fort Lauderdale is expensive and it is not unusual to see people have two or three jobs to cover their costs. So why would anybody who is not financially secure take a management position with more risk, of not being able to pay the bills, and maybe in three years seeing the payout when you can't afford to look long-term?

My standpoint is rather complex because I have worked at the W as a server, pool attendant, and manager. It is true that as a manager I worked 50 - 60-hour work weeks nonstop, however, those weeks were also the weeks where I by far learned the most. On the other hand, I did enjoy the lack of responsibility and course the money while I was working as a server and pool attendant. I would say if you can become a manager.
